Introduction
Except tryptophan and methionine, all other amino acids are coded by 2-6 synonymous codons in the nuclear genome. Different species have different codon preferences  (Lehmann and Libchaber, 2008) , which is referred as codon usage bias. The effect of codon usage bias on protein translation speed is a phenomenon that has been recognized for a long time. Optimal codons are always thought to accelerate translation, while non-optimal codons are known to reduce the translation speed  (Weinberg et al., 2016) . Optimal codons usually correspond to highly abundant tRNAs, which would recognize the ribosome A site faster. Therefore, the codon optimization strategy has been frequently used to increase protein expression efficiency, by replacing non-optimal codons with optimal ones without changing the amino acid sequence. In many cases codon optimization successfully improved protein expression levels, however, sometimes unexpected results including expression failure were also identified  (Gustafsson et al., 2004; Burgess-Brown et al., 2008) . This may be explained by recent discoveries that besides translation speed, codon usage bias also regulates protein folding and function. For example, synonymous mutations on E. coli EgFABP1 coding gene changed the protein solubility ranging from 52% to 95%  (Cortazzo et al., 2002)  and codon optimization of Suf1 affected the efficiency of protein folding, which could be rescued by low temperature treatment  (Zhang et al., 2009) . In addition to E. coli, codon optimization of cyanobacteria circadian clock genes KaiB and KaiC also affected their functions in circadian clock regulation  (Xu et al., 2013) . Besides prokaryotes, the effect of codon bias on protein structure and function in eukaryotes has also been reported. Early studies in some gene candidates associated single-nucleotide silent mutation with protein functions, such as human period genes and sleep preference, MDR1 gene and substrate specificity  (Kimchi-Sarfaty et al., 2007; Carpen et al., 2006) . In 2013, codon usage bias was shown to regulate co-translational folding and protein function by taking the N. crassa circadian clock core component FRQ as an example  (Zhou et al., 2013) . After that, the influence of codon bias on protein structure and function was subsequently confirmed on D. melanogaster circadian clock core component dPER and N. crassa Cross Pathway Control Protein 1 (CPC-1)  (Fu et al., 2016; Lyu and Liu, 2020) . In addition, a significant negative correlation between codon usage bias and protein structural disorder was identified in the genomes of five model organisms: E. coli, N. crassa, S. cerevisiae, C. elegans and D. melanogaster. The use of non-optimal codons in some regions may be a mechanism to reduce translation speed and provide enough folding time  (Zhou et al., 2015) . Compared with translation, the influence of codon usage bias on transcription has been overlooked for years. Although synonymous codon substitution does not alter amino acid sequence, the nucleotide sequence is then changed and is likely to affect the mRNA level in terms of transcription activity and mRNA stability  (Hia and Takeuchi, 2021) . It has been pointed out there was a potential correlation between gene sequence and transcription speed. Specific nucleotide pentamers (5 consecutive nucleotide bases) tended to have a specific transcription rate which was highly conserved in different genes  (Cohen et al., 2018) . Besides, a correlation between codon usage bias and nuclear RNA levels has also been reported in the genome of N. crassa. A batch of transcription factors or histone transmethylases might be involved in supporting this correlation  (Zhao et al., 2021) . In vivo studies in N. crassa showed that the transcriptional activity of luciferase increased with codon optimization, which was unrelated with translation. The inner mechanism was further revealed as reduced gene silencing marker H3K9me3 levels in codon optimized sequences  (Larrondo et al., 2012; Zhou et al., 2016) . In addition to histone modification, previously we also identified the potential correlation among codon choice, cytosine methylation sites and mRNA levels  (Xing et al., 2020) . In addition to transcription elongation, codon bias may also play a regulatory role at the step of termination. Since the "AAUAAA" transcription termination signal is poorly conserved in fungi, possible combinations of A/U rich codons may mimic this signal and terminate transcription prematurely  (Zhou et al., 2018) . The choice of synonymous codons is also likely to affect mRNA halflife  (Gustafsson et al., 2004; Horstick et al., 2015) . Replacing the optimal codons at the 5 ′ end of S. cerevisiae genes with non-optimal codons resulted in only 1/10 of original protein level and 1/3 of original mRNA level  (Hoekema et al., 1987) .  Presnyak et al. (2015)  found in the S. cerevisiae genome that high tAI (tRNA Adaption Index) codons always appeared with a higher frequency in mRNAs with a long half-life. However, there are still some debates on the effect of codon usage bias on mRNA stability. Studies in N. crassa showed no significant difference in mRNA stability before and after codon optimization in the several genes tested  (Horstick et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2019) . Therefore, more researches are needed to reveal the principles clearly. As one of the most frequently used eukaryotic expression system, P. pastoris has been used to express a lot of valuable recombinant protein successfully  (Ahmad et al., 2014) . The expression efficiency of P. pastoris system is tightly correlated with industrial output value. Therefore, research topics including promoter engineering, secretion enhancement and induction module have become hotspots to conduct modification and optimization of the P. pastoris expression system. However, few existing researches focus on the mechanism of how codon usage bias regulates protein expression in P. pastoris, as well as the development of codon optimization strategy. Compared with other organisms, the success rate of codon optimization in P. pastoris seems not high. Although good in some cases, codon optimization was reported to elevate α-amylase and PAS_chr2-2_0376 expression levels by only 40%. Some target proteins even failed to be detected after codon optimization  (Huang et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2021) . Being opposite to N. crassa, the P. pastoris genome prefers to A/U rich codons over G/C rich ones. A/U rich codons may have some pre-translational disadvantage including premature transcription termination and attenuated mRNA stability. However, more studies should be performed to elucidate the role of codon optimization on protein expression in P. pastoris. Similar as in many other organisms, many P. pastoris genes also showed significant negative correlation between codon usage bias and protein structural disorder  (Xu et al., 2021) . In order to examine whether this negative correlation is necessary and important for the proper expression of these genes, here we picked four gene candidates with different CAI value and disorder score. These four genes were PAS_FragD_0013, PAS_chr1-1_0135, PAS_chr1-4_0616 and PAS_chr4_0788. We then performed full-length codon optimization and compared protein levels as well as mRNA levels before and after optimization. Trypsin sensitivity assay was then performed to reveal possible protein structural change caused by codon optimization. mRNA stabilities of sequences with and without codon optimization were also compared. We hope that this study would add more information on how codon optimization affects P. pastoris protein expression profile and provide some guidance on codon optimization strategy development.

Materials and methods


Strains and culture conditions
E. coli DH5α strain was used for plasmid construction and propagation. DH5α cells were cultured in LB medium, containing 0.5% yeast extract, 1% tryptone and 1.0% NaCl at 37 • C. 100 µg/mL of ampicillin or kanamycin was added to the medium when required. P. pastoris strain GS115 was used as the wild-type and the host to make transgenic strains. All cells were shaking cultured at 220 rpm, 30 • C. For seed preparation, yeast cells were inoculated into YPD medium (2% tryptone, 1% yeast extract, 2% glucose) until OD600 reached 6-8. If with GAP promoter, cells were then inoculated into YPD again with initial OD600 = 1.0.

Plasmid construction and strain generation
All gene sequences without codon optimization were PCR amplified from GS115 genome and codon optimized sequences were synthesized by Generay. Each sequence was cloned into the pGAPZα vector first, right after the GAP promoter. After that, the whole promoter-geneterminator cassette was cloned into the pPIC 8 K vector to replace the P AOX1 expression cassette. pPIC 8 K was previously built based on pPIC 3.5 K by deleting the Amp gene (vector map shown in Fig.  S1 ). One-step ligation kit from Vazyme was used for fragment ligation. All primer sets used are listed in Table  S1 , and synthesized by Genewiz. Each final construct was linearized inside his4 by SalI and electroporated into the GS115 wild-type strain. Positive transformants were selected on histidine deficient plates and strains with single copied transgene were verified by PCR.

Data resources and codon bias analysis
The genomic information of P. pastoris GS115 was retrieved from NCBI database ( https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome ). ω and CAI values were calculated as described  (Sharp and Li, 1987)  and codon usage frequency in P. pastoris was downloaded from the Codon Usage Database ( http://www.kazusa.or.jp/codon/cgi-bin/showcodon.cgi? species=4922 ). Protein structural disorder score was calculated by IUPred ( https://iupred2a.elte.hu/ ). When plotting CAI and disorder curves, a sliding window size of 10 codons were used. Correlation between codon usage bias and disorder tendency were calculated as described previously  (Zhou et al., 2015)  with a 10-codon sliding window as well. For codon optimization, synonymous codons with highest ω K.  Liu et al.  value were used to replace original codons. All codon optimized and original sequences in this study are shown in Table  S2 .

SDS-PAGE and Western blot
Cells were cultured to steady state. For different strains, cell density (represented by OD 600 ) were normalized first and same amount of culture were used. Cells were separated from medium by centrifugation. The cell-free medium was then collected and concentrated for 20 times to generate extracellular protein sample. After breaking cells, RIPA buffer was used to extract intracellular proteins. The suspension was centrifuged at 3000 rpm to get rid of unbroken cells, and 12,000 rpm to separate soluble and insoluble fractions. For soluble samples, protein concentration was measured by Bradford assay and 50 µg total protein was loaded on SDS-PAGE. For extracellular and insoluble samples, same amount of samples were loaded. For western blot, primary antibody was his-tag antibody (Beyotime AH367), and secondary antibody was HRP conjugated (Beyotime A0216). Band intensities were quantified by Image J.

Trypsin sensitivity assay
Intracellular total proteins were diluted to a concentration of 7 mg/ mL. For each strain, 150 µL protein extract was treated with trypsin (final concentration 1-20 µg/mL) at 25 • C. A 20 µL sample was taken from the reaction at indicated time points, boiled with protein loading buffer immediately and resolved on a SDS-PAGE gel. Western blot was performed afterwards to examine target protein levels.

RNA extraction and quantitative real-time PCR
Cells were cultured to steady state and total RNA was extracted by trizol reagent. RNA concentration was measured by NanoDrop Microvolume Spectrophotometer. For each sample, 2 µg total RNA was used for cDNA synthesis (FastKing RT Kit, TIANGEN) and subsequent quantitative PCR (SYBR Green, TIANGEN). qPCR program was set as following: step 1, 95 • C for 5 min; step 2, 58 • C for 30 s; step 3, 72 • C for 2 min, repeat step 1-3 for 31 cycles; step 4, 72 • C for 2 min. Primers for amplification were designed by the help of Beacon designer 7.9 and sequences are listed in Table  S1 . Primer amplification efficiency was measured and considered when comparing original and codon optimized sequences.

RNA degradation assay 2.7.1. In vitro
For each time point, 1 μg total RNA from the ori strain and 1 μg total RNA from the opt strain were mixed on ice. RNase A (BEYOTIME, ST578) and DEPC water were then added with a final concentration of 0.2 μg/µL and final volume of 10 µL. Immediately the tubes were transferred into 37 • C water bath to allow RNA degradation for different time length. Reverse transcription was then performed with the existence of RNaseA inhibitor. After cDNA synthesis, subsequent quantitative PCR was carried out similarly in 2.6.

In vivo
Cultured cells (OD 600 = 1.0) were treated 1, 10-phenanthroline (0.15 mg/mL) to inhibit transcription and allow RNA degradation. For each time point, cells were harvested by quick centrifugation and RNA was extracted by trizol reagent. cDNA synthesis and subsequent quantitative PCR was carried out similarly in 2.6.  

Results


Analyze the codon usage bias and protein structural disorder of the 4 gene candidates
In order to study the necessity of the negative correlation between codon usage bias and protein structural disorder, we picked 4 gene candidates with strong negative correlation. The four genes are PAS_-FragD_0013, PAS_chr1-1_0135, PAS_chr1-4_0616 and PAS_chr4_0788, abbreviated as 0013, 0135, 0616 and 0788. Both 0013 and 0788 are predicted to be ribosomal proteins. The other two candidates are annotated as hypothetical proteins without a defined function. CAI value, disorder tendency score and their correlation are shown in Table  1 . The genome average correlation is 0.0383  (Xu et al., 2021) , and all these four genes have a correlation below -0.5 (ranked within top 1% of all the 2084 genes with negative correlation, Table  S3 ). Codon Adaptation Index (CAI) and disorder curves along the ORF are plotted in Fig.  1 . Among the 4 gene candidates, 0616 seems to have highest disorder tendency while 0013, 0135, and 0788 seem to have lower disorder tendency.

Codon optimization affects both protein and mRNA expression levels of the gene candidates studied
Codon optimization was then performed on these genes, which completely eliminated the negative correlation. All original (named 0616ori, 0013ori, 0135ori and 0788ori) and codon optimized (named 0616opt, 0013opt, 0135opt and 0788opt) sequences were cloned into the pPIC 8 K vector and electroporated into yeast wild-type strain GS115. For each sequence, single copied transgenic yeast strain was selected. The expression of these sequences were driven by GAP promoter, and a 6 ×His tag was added at C-terminus for antibody recognition. The 6×His tag also distinguished the manually introduced sequence from endogenous sequence. Then intracellular target protein levels were examined in strains bearing original or codon optimized sequences. Western blot suggests that 0013, 0616 and 0788 proteins were successfully expressed (Fig.  2 ), and the sizes were similar as predicted. The smaller bands in 0616 strains may be partial degradation products (Fig.  2B ). Interestingly, codon optimization of the three genes failed to elevate protein expression levels, and even resulted in a decrease. The level of 0013, 0616 and 0788 proteins were decreased by around 20% (Fig.  2A&E ), 40% (Fig.  2B&F ) and 60% (Fig.  2C&G ), respectively. As for 0135, we failed to detect any protein bands in both ori and opt strains at the beginning with a normal exposure. After a very long exposure, some bands showed up with the size much larger than expected (Fig.  2D ). Since 0135 was predicted to have a secretion signal, we then checked its extracellular level. Shown by Fig.  2H , it was indeed detected in culture medium. The size change may be caused by some extensive modifications or unknown mechanisms. Anyway, it seems that codon optimization failed to elevate the 0135 protein level as well (Fig.  2H ). mRNA levels in these strains were then checked by RT-qPCR. As shown by Fig.  3 , mRNA levels of 0013 and 0788 were elevated by around 70% (Fig.  3A ) and 40% (Fig.  3C ) after codon optimization, respectively. However, 0616 mRNA level was decreased to 35% (Fig.  3B ) and 0135 mRNA level was decreased to only 20% (Fig.  3D ). For 0013 and 0788, mRNA levels were not consistent with their protein levels. Protein stabilities were examined later to further look into this question.

Codon optimization affects protein stability and solubility of 0616 and 0788
We then performed trypsin digestion assay to compare the structural stability of proteins translated from original and codon-optimized sequences. Trypsin cleaves proteins after basic amino acids (Lys, Arg). Proteins with different three-dimensional structures may have different extent of basic amino acids exposure on the surface, thus exhibiting different trypsin sensitivity. After adding trypsin, protein samples were taken at time points 0, 5, 15, and 30 min and examined by SDS-PAGE and Western blot. As shown in Fig.  4 , codon optimization significantly altered the stability of 0616 (Fig.  4B ), slightly decreased the stability of 0788 (Fig.  4C ) and did not affect 0013 (Fig.  4A ). This indicates that codon optimization possibly affected the conformation of 0616 and 0788. The compromised stability of 0788opt may be one contributing factor towards its lower protein level. As for 0013, the inconsistent mRNA and protein levels still cannot be explained. However, trypsin sensitivity only measures in vitro stability, which may not represent real in vivo stability accurately. Besides stability, solubility of a protein is also tightly correlated with its correct conformation. In addition to soluble fraction, we analyzed target protein levels from the insoluble fraction of intracellular protein sample. As a result, codon optimization decreased the solubility of 0616 significantly (Fig.  5B ) and 0788 slightly (Fig.  5C ). Besides, solubility of 0013 was improved by codon optimization (Fig.  5A ), and no 0135 proteins were detected in the insoluble fraction (Fig.  5D ).

Codon optimization affects 0788 and 0616 mRNA stability
Similar as trypsin digestion, we then performed RNase A treatment to compare mRNA stability of genes before and after codon optimization in vitro. For each gene, same amount of total RNA from ori and opt strains were mixed and treated with RNase A for 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, and 30 min. Samples were then reverse transcribed to cDNA and examined by qPCR to compare ori and opt mRNA levels. RNase A inhibitor was added during     reverse transcription to avoid further degradation. For each mRNA, the level at 0 min was set as 1, and the relative ratio at other time points were calculated. As shown by Fig.  6A&B , codon optimization has little effect on the stability of 0013 and 0616 mRNA. However, mRNA stability of 0788 was significantly strengthened (Fig.  6C ) while that of 0135 (Fig.  6D ) was compromised in the codon optimized strains. Since RNase A sensitivity may not represent real mRNA stability inside the cell, we then measured mRNA degradation rate in vivo by 1, 10-phenanthroline treatment. 1, 10-phenanthroline inhibits transcription, and relative RNA degradation rate with GAP mRNA was plotted at 0, 6, 12, 16, 22, 28 min time points (Fig.  7 ). Consistent with RNase A degradation, the in vivo degradation rate of 0013 was comparable between ori and opt sequences (Fig.  7A ). 0788opt was slightly more stable than 0788ori (Fig.  7C ). Although the different was smaller than in vitro study (Fig.  6B ), this might partially explain its elevated mRNA level (Fig.  3C ). Surprisingly, the in vivo stability of 0616 was quite different from in vitro, with a much faster degradation rate after codon optimization (Fig.  7B ). Being consistent with in vitro stability, the in vivo stability of 0135opt was also lower. Again, the faster degradation rates of 0616opt and 0135opt may be a contributing factor for their compromised mRNA levels (Fig.  3B&D ).

Conclusion and discussion
In this study, we picked 4 gene candidates in P. pastoris with extreme negative correlation between codon usage bias and structural disorder tendency. In order to study the importance of the negative correlation, we performed codon optimization on these 4 genes to completely eliminate it. As a result, codon optimization failed to elevate, and even decreased their protein levels. Codon optimization also altered mRNA level, as well as protein and mRNA stabilities in some genes. The detailed effect might be related with specific gene sequence and protein structure, which differed in each gene. As reported by many studies in P. pastoris, codon optimization has also been applied in a couple of endogenous and heterologous proteins including PAS_chr2-2_0376  (Xu et al., 2021) , lysozyme  (He et al., 2020) , α-amylase  (Huang et al., 2017) , polygalacturonase  (Karaoglan and Erden-Karaoglan, 2020)  and GFP (data not shown). The effects were not bad, with an elevation by different extents instead of reduction. Compared with the 4 gene candidates here, these genes are with much weaker negative correlation between codon usage bias and secondary structural disorder. Therefore, the poor optimization phenotype in gene studied here may be correlated with the strong negative correlation. However, more examples still need to be given to strengthen this correlation and reveal more inner mechanisms under it. Besides, combining all trypsin sensitivity and solubility phenotypes so far, codon optimization seems to have a larger effect on structure alternation in genes whose protein product have larger structural disorder tendency (0376, disorder score 0.656; 0616, disorder score 0.679). Therefore, when dealing with this group of proteins, special codon optimization strategy may be needed. Here we only focus on "extreme" codon optimization, in which all codons are replaced by the most optimal synonymous codons. "Extreme" codon optimization may work well in most genes, however, may not be suitable for genes with strong negative correlation. "Weaker" codon optimization strategies by using secondary optimal codons or keeping some negative correlation patches may be tried to solve the problems.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Mian Zhou: Project planning, Experimental design, Data analysis and Writing the manuscript. Kunshan Liu: Project planning, Experimental design, Data analysis and Writing the manuscript, Performing most of the experiments. Yaqi Ouyang: Performing some experiments and offering suggestions. Ru Lin: Performing some experiments and offering suggestions. Chenyu Ge: Performing some experiments and offering suggestions.