SLAM (for signalling lymphocyte-activation molecule), is a glycosylated type-I transmembrane protein, of relative molecular mass 70K, that is present on the surface of B and T cells; it is a high-af®nity self-ligand. As triggering of SLAM co-activates T-or Blymphocyte responses, it is considered to be important in bidirectional T $ B-cell stimulation 1±7 . Monoclonal antibodies directed against SLAM induce proliferation of human CD45RO high memory T cells in a CD28-independent manner, whereas resting T cells are unresponsive 
1±3  . Anti-SLAM acts as a co-activator, together with antibodies against the T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) or complexes of peptides with the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) on the surface of antigen-presenting cells, in stimulating resting T cells to synthesize DNA and/or to initiate cytokine gene activation cascades  1, 2  . Triggering of signals by anti-SLAM antibodies induces the interferon-g gene and redirects Th2 responses of antigen-speci®c T-cell clones to a Th1 or Th0 phenotype  3±5  . Exposure of B cells to a soluble form of the SLAM ectodomain or to L cells transfected with membrane-bound SLAM dramatically enhances B-cell proliferation and production of IgM, IgG and IgA, in conjunction with anti-CD40 monoclonal antibodies or other costimuli  6  . Anti-SLAM antibodies alone fail to enhance B-cell proliferation, even having an inhibitory effect  6  . Thus, SLAM-induced signal-transduction events in T lymphocytes are different from those in B cells.

Cloning of SAP
In order to determine the mechanism by which SLAM induces signalling, we identi®ed proteins that interact with the cytoplasmic domain of human SLAM. Using a yeast two-hybrid system with the 77-amino-acid human SLAM cytoplasmic domain as bait and a human T-cell library, eight complementary DNA clones were isolated that encoded a 128-amino-acid polypeptide chain which we term SLAM-associated protein, or SAP. To con®rm that the cDNAs were full-length, we also isolated cDNA clones from a human T-cell (Jurkat) library and from a murine (C57B16) thymus library. The predicted human SAP protein comprises a single SH2 domain (residues 6±102) followed by a short 26-aminoacid tail (residues 103±128). Human and murine SAP are highly homologous (96%) in both the SH2 and tail domains (Fig.  1 ). The SAP SH2 domain was clearly related to other SH2 domains, particularly those of SHIP (45%), EAT-2 (40%) and Abl (35%), but its short tail was unlike any known protein domain. Antibodies directed against human or mouse SAP-tail sequences detected a 15K protein in detergent lysates made from either human T cells (Fig.  2a ) or murine thymocytes (Fig.  2b ). Because the observed relative molecular mass was consistent with the predicted value, our human and mouse SAP cDNAs are unlikely to code for a fragment of a larger protein. We found that SLAM and SAP interact in T lymphocytes because a human SAP fusion protein, with glutathione-S-transferase, can speci®cally precipitate SLAM from detergent lysates made from a murine T-cell line (EL-4) transfected with human SLAM. By contrast, no interaction was detected in lysates made with untransfected EL-4 cells (Fig.  2c ). Conversely, SAP was co-immunoprecipitated with anti-SLAM antibodies using detergent lysates made from activated human peripheral blood lymphocytes  5  (Fig.  2d ).

Identi®cation of SAP as a T-cell protein
Human SAP messenger RNA expression was highest in the thymus and less in spleen and peripheral blood lymphocytes (Fig.  3a ). SAP was expressed in all major subsets of human T cells (CD4 + , CD45RO + , CD45RA + and CD8 + ) (Fig.  3c ), in the T-cell tumour cell line Jurkat, and in the Burkitt lymphoma line Raji which is positive in the Epstein±Barr virus (EBV). No transcripts were detected in the EBV + Burkitt lymphomas Namalwa or BL41/B95-8, the EBV-transformed cell line X50-7, the EBV + marmoset cell lines B95-8 and FF41, the EBV -Burkitt lymphoma BJAB, or in the pre-B ALL lines LAZ 221 and NALM 6 (Fig.  3 , and data not shown). Figure  2  Characterization of the human and murine SAP proteins and their interactions with SLAM. a, Jurkat cells and human peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) were lysed and postnuclear lysates (1 mg ml -1 ) were immunoprecipitated (IP) with a rabbit antiserum directed against human SAP or with a control serum (3 ml). Samples were analysed on SDS±PAGE and immunoblotted with antihuman-SAP (1/1,000). b, Postnuclear lysates (1 mg ml -1 ) from C57B1/6 thymocytes were immunoprecipitated with an anti-murine SAP antibody (3 ml), resolved on SDS±PAGE and immunoblotted with anti-mouse-SAP (1/1,000). c, SLAM-or vector-transfected EL-4 cells were cell-surface biotinylated and lysed in detergent. Postnuclear lysates (1 mg ml -1 ) were incubated with 5 mg GST or GST±SAP for 1 h in the presence of glutathione beads or 1 mg anti-SLAM antibodies (a gift from DNAX Research Institute) for 3 h in the presence of protein G beads. Bead-associated proteins were extracted and immunoblotted with streptavidin±HRP. d, Human PBL were activated with phytohaemagglutinin for 5 d. Cells were lysed (1 3 10 8 per ml) and immunoprecipitated with an anti-SLAM monoclonal antibody or with a control antibody. Immunoprecipitates were resolved on SDS±PAGE and immunoblotted with anti-SLAM serum (top) or with a rabbit anti-SAP antibody (bottom). A small amount of SAP mRNA detected in the small intestine probably resulted from lymphocyte contamination. In wild-type mice, SAP is expressed in T cells but not in B cells, whereas no mRNA or protein could be detected in CD3e null mice which lack T cells (C.W., J.S. and C.T., manuscript in preparation). Both human mRNA species encoding SAP (2.5 and 0.9 kilobases (kb)) (Fig.  3 ) were represented among the cDNA clones isolated in the two-hybrid system and encoded the same open reading frame, but differed in their 39 untranslated sequences. Collectively, our results show that, unlike SLAM, SAP is primarily expressed in T cells. SAP is encoded by the XLP disease gene By using a 45-kb pBAC clone that contained all four exons of murine SAP (Fig.  1 ), the SAP gene was localized within band A5.1 of the murine X chromosome (C.W., J.S. and C.T., manuscript in preparation). Because of synteny between murine band A5.1 and human Xq25, where the locus for the immune de®ciency X-linked lymphoproliferative disease (XLP) had been mapped 8±11 , we investigated whether the SAP gene could be involved in this disease. Moreover, the observation that in XLP uncontrolled B-cell proliferation following EBV infection often leads to fatal infectious mononucleosis, malignant lymphomas, hypogammaglobulinaemia or aplastic anaemia  11, 12  was in agreement with the involvement of SLAM in T $ B-cell interactions. To test the idea that SAP is encoded by the XLP gene, we isolated SAP cDNAs from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of three XLP patients: a previously described patient, A1 (ref. 13), and two brothers, B1 and B2, who were recently diagnosed as having XLP. XLP patient A1 developed hypogammaglobulinaemia and recurrent pulmonary infections a few months after severe EBV-induced infectious mononucleosis  13  . His family history and the persistence of an unbalanced virus±host relationship after EBV infection are consistent with the main features of XLP syndrome  13  . When the products from reverse transcription with polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) of T cells from patient A1 were analysed by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (Fig.  4a ), three products were initially found of 629 base pairs (bp) (the full-length SAP coding sequence), 565 bp and 520 bp. On cloning the RT-PCR products of patient A1, four different mRNAs were identi®ed: namely, full-length hSAP; a coding sequence, DE2, which lacked the 64 nucleotides of exon 2 (A1-1 in Fig.  5 ); E3D55, with a 55-nucleotide deletion in exon 3 (hSAPD55 in Fig.  5 ); and a cDNA with both a deleted exon 2 and the deletion E3D55 (Al-2 in Fig.  5 ). T cells from patient A1 thus had four mRNA species coding for different forms of SAP, of which two were detected in healthy individuals (629 and 574 bp) (Fig.  5 ) and two were speci®c for the patient (A1-1 of 565 bp and A1-2 of 520 bp; note that the 574-and 565-bp species cannot be separated by PAGE in Fig.  4 ). The predicted amino-acid sequences were indicative of two truncated proteins, in which essentially only the ®rst exon of SAP is intact. RT-PCR products from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of 60  healthy individuals contained two mRNA species (of 629 and 574 bp), as judged by PAGE and nucleotide-sequence analysis (Figs  4a, 5 ). These represented hSAP and E3D55 (hSAPD55 in Fig.  5a ) in which part of exon 3 had been deleted. The E3D55 coding sequence started at the beginning of exon 3 at nucleotide position 288 and ended at nucleotide 342 (Fig.  5a ). Because of a frameshift, the predicted protein sequence was identical to that of the ®rst two exons of SAP (amino acids 1±67), followed by a nine-amino-acid sequence and a stop codon (Fig.  5b ). The results taken together indicate that the mRNAs of patient A1 had a deleted exon 2 or a deletion in exon 2 plus part of exon 3. These mutant forms derived from patient A1 were estimated to represent 90% of his SAP mRNA. The 55-nucleotide deletion in exon 3 in healthy individuals is readily explained by the presence of an infrequently used splicing acceptor site within that exon: CAG preceded by a CT-rich stretch of nucleotides  14  (Fig.  6a ). But to explain the frequent deletion of exon 2 in patient A1, the intron sequences surrounding exons 1, 2 and 3 had to be determined, so we designed a PCR assay based on sequences of at least 150 nucleotides of all four introns. This was facilitated by a new sequence in the EMBL database (accession number AL022718) indicating that XLP encoded a protein, SH2DIA. Its cDNA, genomic DNA and protein sequences were identical to human SAP, and in addition the exon/intron bound-aries reported were identical to those in the mouse gene (Fig.  1 ). Upon sequencing the 443-bp PCR product derived from the exon-2 area, we found a C ! G mutation in the nucleotide adjacent to the exon 2 splice acceptor site in the DNA of patient A1 (Fig.  6a ). This mutation is known to affect the ef®ciency of the splice acceptor site  15  and explains the skipping of exon 2 in most (,90%) of the patient's SAP mRNA species. To exclude the possibility that the point mutation found in XLP patient A1 represented a genetic polymorphism, we designed a restriction enzyme assay based on the fact that the C ! G mutation generated a novel MnlI restriction site in the 443-bp exon-2 PCR product. As shown in Fig.  6b , MnlI generated four fragments (of 187, 151, 64 and 41 bp) with Al's 443-bp PCR product, whereas DNA samples from 108 healthy individuals generated three fragments (of 251, 151 and 41 bp) (see, for example, CT-1, CT-2 and B3 in Fig.  6b , and results not shown). Because patient A1 was Italian, these controls included DNA from 50 healthy Italian females (that is, 100 X chromosomes). The remaining 86 X chromosomes were from individuals with a random genetic background in the Boston area (28 female and 30 male). Collectively, our results demonstrate that A1 has a mutation affecting the exon 2 splice acceptor site, which gives rise to severely truncated forms of SAP. As this mutation was not detected in 186 X chromosomes from healthy individuals, it did not represent a genetic polymorphism. These results indicate that SAP is encoded by the XLP gene. The two other XLP patients, brothers B1 and B2, had a deletion of the SAP gene, whereas a healthy brother, B3, had a normal SAP gene. B1 was a 23-year-old male with a history of recurrent pulmonary infections, dysgammaglobulinaemia (raised IgA and IgM), poor speci®c antibody responses to tetanus toxoid antigen, and a depressed T-cell proliferative response to mitogens. He developed fever, pneumonia and hilar adenopathy which quickly progressed to fulminant infectious mononucleosis with haemophagocytosis; EBV infection was documented by PCR and serology. B2 also suffers from XLP syndrome, which manifests as pancytopaenia, splenomegaly, dysgammaglobulinaemia and depressed T-cell proliferative responses to mitogens. B3 appears to be healthy, but two other brothers, for whom no material was available, had classic XLP symptoms: one has recurrent EBV + non-Hodgkin's lymphomas and another died with a diagnosis of Wegener's granulomatosis and pulmonary in®ltration. In contrast to the healthy sibling B3, no RT-PCR product encoding hSAP could be isolated from the peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients B1 and B2 (Fig.  4a ). This was because no mRNA was detected in northern blotting experiments with RNA from patients B1 (data not shown) and B2 (Fig.  4b ). Thus, either the SAP gene was not transcribed in T cells from B1 and B2 or the gene was deleted, which commonly happens in XLP patients  11, 12  . As none of the four exons encoding SAP could be generated in a PCR analysis based upon genomic DNA from B1 and B2 (Fig.  6c ) and because a control PCR reaction for exon 2 of BRCA1 gave the expected product, we conclude that the SAP gene was deleted in XLP patients B1 and B2. By contrast, DNA from B3 generated PCR fragments of the expected size and with the wild-type sequence (a similar result has been obtained by J. Sumegi, personal communication). These analyses of XLP patients A1, B1 and B2 show that the XLP gene encodes SAP. Binding of the SH2 domain of SAP Identi®cation of SAP as the gene product that is altered in XLP raised the question of how this SLAM-associated T-cell protein could account for the immunological disturbances of the disease. The SLAM cytoplasmic domain contains three tyrosine residues (Y281, Y307 and Y327) that are surrounded by consensus SH2domain-binding sequences  1  , which suggests a possible interaction with the SH2 domain of SAP. Because SAP binds to SLAM in the yeast two-hybrid system, the binding of the SAP SH2 domain to SLAM must be more complex than the usual interactions with a short phosphotyrosine-containing peptide. To determine to which portion of the cytoplasmic domain of SLAM the SAP SH2 domain binds, we co-expressed constructs encoding the CD8 extracellular and transmembrane domains and truncated cytoplasmic domains of SLAM with human SAP in COS-7 cells (Fig.  7a ). Both CD8±SLAM proteins, that is CD8±SLAM3 (derived from a natural variant of SLAM with a short cytoplasmic domain containing only Y281) and CD8±SLAMdel1 (containing Y281 and Y307), co-precipitated SAP with the same ef®ciency as SLAM itself (Fig.  7a ); two control chimaeric proteins, comprising the CD8 transmembrane and ecto domains and either the CD3-e or the CD3-z cytoplasmic domain, did not co-precipitate SAP (Fig.  7a ). This suggested the presence of a speci®c SAP-binding site around the most membrane-proximal tyrosine residue (Y281) of the SLAM cytoplasmic tail. As predicted from the in vivo results, only a peptide (SLAM Y1) containing Y281 coupled to agarose beads was able speci®cally to precipitate SAP from murine thymocyte lysates, and not peptides containing the other tyrosine residues in the cytoplasmic domain of SLAM (Fig.  7b ). More important, binding of SAP to agarose-coupled SLAM Y1 was blocked only by the same peptide regardless of whether Y281 was replaced by phenylalanine (SLAM F1) or by a peptide in which phosphotyrosine replaced Y281 (SLAM pY1) (Fig.  7c ). This con®ned the binding site to a short amino-acid sequence in SLAM and con®rmed that phosphorylation of Y281 was not required for binding of the two polypeptide chains. However, we found that the SH2 domain of SAP was functionally intact as it could be puri®ed on a Sepharose± phosphotyrosine column (data not shown). In addition, four SAP mutants with deletions in the tail domain (Fig.  1 ) and co-transfected with the CD8±SLAM3 chimaera were able to interact with the short cytoplasmic domain of SLAM3, which contained the Y281 segment (Fig.  7d ). Collectively these results show that SLAM interacts with SAP through part of its SH2 domain.

SAP blocks recruitment of SHP-2 to SLAM
The novelty of SLAM±SAP recognition, in which the usual requirements for SH2-domain interactions seem to be altered, suggested that SAP could block physiological reactions involving SLAM, acting as a natural inhibitor. This model would predict that SAP mutants that are unable to bind to SLAM could not act as inhibitors. We were able to test this hypothesis because we previously found (J.S. et al., manuscript in preparation) that after phosphorylation by c-fyn, SLAM recruited the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2. First, two SAP mutants were tested: the A1 deletion (Dexon2 E3D55) and a classic mutation in the SH2 domain that affects binding of phosphotyrosine (SAP32R ! Q). Neither mutant bound to the cytoplasmic tail of SLAM, as judged by in vivo (Fig.  8a ) or in vitro (Fig.  8b ) assays. Thus, neither SAP mutant could act as a dominant-negative mutant through SLAM. More important, the experiment with mutant SAP32R ! Q revealed that the interaction of SAP and SLAM depends on an intact phosphotyrosine binding pocket. An XLP patient with a mutation in R32 has recently been found (J. Sumegi, personal communication). These results, and the failure of the two SAP mutants to bind in patients, further support the idea that SAP±SLAM interaction is defective in XLP. Next, SLAM and c-fyn were co-transfected with or without SAP into COS-7 cells, which contain endogenous SHP-2. If SLAM was phosphorylated by c-fyn, SHP-2 was co-precipitated with anti-SLAM antibody (Fig.  8c ); in the absence of c-fyn, SLAM did not bind SHP-2. Introduction of SAP, together with SLAM and c-fyn, blocked the binding of SHP-2 and SLAM. The absence of SHP-2 in the presence of SAP could not be due to lesser phosphorylation of SLAM, because a signi®cantly larger percentage of SLAM molecules was phosphorylated in the presence of SAP than in its absence. These results were con®rmed by reciprocal co-immunoprecipitation with anti-SAP reagents (data not shown). By contrast (Fig.  8d ), mutant SAP32R ! Q did not prevent binding of SHP-2 to SLAM. A similar result was obtained with the A1 deletion mutant (data not shown). Thus, recruitment of SHP-2 to phosphorylated SLAM was blocked by binding of SAP to the sequence surrounding the most membrane-proximal tyrosine residue, Y281. As SHP-2 can act as a negative regulator of signal transduction  15  , binding of SAP could have a positive effect on co-stimulation by anti-SLAM antibody. To test this, we overexpressed SAP by transient transfection into the Jurkat T cells, together with an interleukin (IL)-2-promoter/luciferase reporter construct and SLAM. Stimulation of these transfected cells with a combination of anti-SLAM and anti-CD3 monoclonal antibodies signi®cantly increased IL-2-promoter/luciferase reporter activation compared with Jurkat cells transfected with SLAM alone (Fig.  9 ). Anti-SLAM by itself did not induce the IL-2-promoter/luciferase reporter signal, and the signal induced by anti-CD3 reagents was weaker than that generated by the two antibodies together. Thus, overexpression of SAP in T cells has a positive effect on the co-stimulatory activity of anti-SLAM.

Discussion
We have identi®ed the gene that is altered in XLP as SAP by using an indirect, functional approach. We have shown that SLAM is the cellsurface protein to which the XLP gene product   