Introduction
During World War II, radar was invented as a remote sensor with all-weather, all-time capability. Over the past 80 years or thereabouts, radar has provided humans with clairvoyance and clairaudience and has been widely applied in both national defense and civilian activities  [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] . The examples include surveillance, reconnaissance, navigation, fire control, and traffic control. The first practical radar system, developed by Britain in the 1930s, detected targets using a single pulse. At the end of World War II, the moving target indication radar was invented, which could distinguish moving targets from clutter by the phase changes of the echoes in adjacent transmitter-receiver periods. In the 1950s, the United States developed the pulse-Doppler (PD) radar, which obtained the Doppler frequency from the phase changes of the target echoes in multiple successive pulse cycles. Therefore, the PD radar could suppress clutter more effectively and measure the target velocity with higher accuracy than the previous radars. In the mid-1950s, the United States also developed the phased-array radar, in which a beam of radio waves generated by a computer-controlled array of antennas could be electronically steered in different directions. Unlike the mechanical scanning radar, the phased-array radar searches, detects, and tracks multiple batches of targets in different directions simultaneously, with quick switching of the beam direction. Its benefits include multi-functionality, agility, change celerity, high data rate, strong anti-interference ability, and high reliability  [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] . Radar waveforms have always played an important role in radar development  [6] . In 1943, North  [7]  pointed out the importance of a matched filter (the basis of radar signal processing) in detecting the targets among echo signals with known transmitted waveforms. In 1953, Woodward  [8]  evaluated the range and Doppler resolution of transmitting waveforms by using an ambiguity function, laying the foundation of radar waveform design. Dicke  [9]  proposed the use of linear frequency modulation signals in matched filtering, where a signal with a time-bandwidth product larger than one effectively solved the contradiction between the range resolution and signal energy. Linear frequency modulation has replaced the early unmodulated rectangular waveform as the most commonly utilized type of radar signal. Narrowband signals are widely used in low-resolution radars (LRRs) because they can be easily generated and processed. Accordingly, the echo data are relatively low-volume, and can be easily realized in engineering activities. In general, LRRs work well for simple tasks such as detection and ranging. However, the development of electronic devices has increased the demand for advanced functions such as imaging and target recognition. Owing to their low-range resolution, LRRs obscure the fine structural information of complex targets, and can only approximately estimate the motion parameters. They also have weak anti-interference and anti-clutter ability  [10] . Moreover, a target with multiple scattering centers causes an angular glint under narrowband conditions  [14] , and multipath echoes and the direct wave distance cannot be resolved at small elevation angles  [15] . These limitations significantly reduce the tracking performance of LRRs. In addition, narrowband signals contain limited target-feature information, reducing the effectiveness of classifying and identifying the targets  [11] [12] [13] [14] . Therefore, LRRs cannot meet the requirements of target recognition. Meanwhile, radar targets and the detection environment have become increasingly challenging  [16] [17] [18] . Space surveillance is challenged by the proliferation of fast, highly mobile, dense, and weakly detectable targets (spacecraft and space debris, warheads, and decoys from ballistic missile defense systems and dense unmanned aerial vehicle colonies), which inhabit space, the atmosphere, and the ground. In addition, the rapid development of electronic countermeasures  [19, 20]  causes strong active jamming, which may impact effective target detection. Effectively distinguishing the target among the jammed signals has become the core of improving radar performance. To meet the increasingly complex requirements of target recognition, modern research has focused on high-resolution radars (HRRs) with high range resolution and high angle resolution  [11-14, 21, 22] . The unique advantages of HRRs in detection, tracking, imaging, and parameter measurement have improved the performance of target recognition. First, the increased radar-signal bandwidth of an HRR reduces the range resolution to below the target size. The target is distributed among multiple range-resolution units, thereby suppressing its radar cross-section (RCS) fluctuations and improving the detection performance. The superior detection and tracking performances of HRRs are especially evident under clutter and jamming conditions. Second, the synthetic aperture radar (SAR) and inverse synthetic aperture radar (ISAR) can effectively compensate the platform or uncoordinated movements of the target during the tracking period, obtaining two-dimensional high-resolution images  [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] . Third, the measurement accuracy of HRRs can be improved by advanced signal processing algorithms, enabling high-precision phase-derived velocity measurement (PDVM)  [30, 31]  and micro-motion feature extraction  [32] [33] [34] [35] . In general, accurate target recognition is benefitted by abundant target information (such as the microcharacteristics of the target and echo amplitudes of the scattering points), high measurement accuracy, and a high tracking-data rate. However, the advantages and applicability of HRRs are restricted by factors such as low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), several false alarms (which decreases the tracking accuracy of multi-scatter point targets), high demands of motion compensation, and sensitivity of the target attitude  [11] [12] [13] [14] . These limitations cause problems in detection, tracking, imaging, and recognition by HRRs, as outlined below: (1) In HRR detection, the echo energy of the target is dispersed into multiple range units, which decreases the SNR. In addition, the range resolution unit of HRRs is very small. Therefore, as the target moves between adjacent pulses, the target-echo envelope often moves across the range unit, affecting the long-term integration of the target echo. Both problems reduce the target detection performance and shorten the operating range of the HRR. (2) In HRR tracking, the enlarged signal bandwidth decreases the size of the radar range resolution unit, increasing the false-alarm density. Together with the decreased SNR of detection, the increased false-alarm density raises the performance demands on the data association module and track filter module. (3) In HRR imaging, the enlarged imaging range reduces the SNR. To correct this problem, radar imaging research has focused on the motion compensation technique and imaging methods that cope with low SNR data. ISAR motion compensation and imaging algorithms are required under discontinuous or sparse conditions. Multi-target ISAR imaging technique is gaining relevance in today's increasingly complex imaging environments. (4) Finally, the fairness of the data in classifying and recognizing targets in one-dimensional highresolution images is influenced by three factors, namely target-aspect sensitivity, translation sensitivity, and amplitude sensitivity. The training samples are usually ideal data obtained with a sufficiently high SNR, whereas the test data are collected in variable environments with differing SNRs. When the signal energy is low, the one-dimensional image is affected by environmental noise, clutter, and other interferences, which seriously reduce the recognition performance of the HRR. Focusing on these problems, this paper systematically introduces the novel technologies of an HRR and discusses the relevant issues and solutions in detection, tracking, imaging, and recognition by the HRR. Finally, it presents the latest progress and representative results of HRR-based research, and the prospective development of HRRs.

Development of HRR
The development of HRR originated from the demands of space-target observations  [14, 21] . Space targets include man-made satellites (such as space stations and spacecraft), space debris, ballistic missiles, and other objects launched into the atmosphere. As the space target is far away, the detection range of ground-based instruments must be as long as possible, perhaps up to 5000 km. The required detection range of space-target radar generally ranges from 1000 to 5000 km. Meanwhile, to image satellites and space debris and to distinguish multiple targets, the space-target radar requires a high range resolution, which is usually achieved by enlarging the signal bandwidth. Finally, the space-target radar should achieve rapid beam scanning and beam forming, as well as multi-target detection and tracking. Obviously, space-target detection would improve the implementations of national air defense, antimissile actions, strategic early warnings, and command automation of sovereign countries. For this purpose, it is necessary to innovate the radar system, signal waveform, and signal processing. These innovations have largely promoted the development of HRRs. How to improve radar detection, parameter estimation, continuous estimation, imaging identification, and recognition comprise the technical challenges of "integration of HHRs detection and tracking". HRRs are mainly applied in the military field. To effectively resolve and identify the warheads and decoys in ballistic missile defense systems, the Lincoln Laboratory of the United States began researching wideband radars in the 1960s. This study culminated in the world's first wideband radar ALCOR  [36]  in 1970, which utilized waveforms with a bandwidth of 512 MHz in reentry tracking. In the 1990s, the wideband phased-array ground-based radar (GBR) working in the X-band was an important component of national missile defense and the U.S. terminal high altitude area defense (THAAD) system. GBR performs a series of tasks such as target detection, tracking, and threat classification. Antimissile tests using GBR-P, a GBR prototype developed by Raytheon Company (headquartered in Waltham, Massachusetts, USA), were successfully carried out in September 2000 1)2) . The sea-based X-band radar operates over a bandwidth of 1 GHz  [37] . To improve the operational capability of the ballistic missile defense system in detecting outer space movements, the United States developed transportable FBX-T radar, which enlarges the signal bandwidth of THAAD-GBR from 500 MHz to 1 GHz. The tracking and imaging radar (TIRA) system developed in Germany works in both the L-and Ku-bands. The Ku-band is used for wideband imaging with an initial bandwidth of 800 MHz. After continuous upgrading, the Ku bandwidth of TIRA has reached 2.1 GHz  [38] .

Range-spread target detection technology
When the range resolution is lower than the target size, the original ideal point target is spatially resolved into several scattering cells, thereby becoming a range-spread target. The resulting spatial-scattering density provides abundant information on the target (such as its length, structure, and attitude), and decreases the fluctuations in the received signals. These advantages improve the detection performance of the radar, especially in cluttered environments  [39] . However, spatially distributed target detection is disadvantaged by low SNR. High-range resolution disperses the echo power into multiple range cells, but in a certain noise-temperature situation, high-range resolution means a larger signal bandwidth, and consequently, a larger noise power at the receiver. Both factors decrease the detection performance and reduce the operating range of HRRs. As the traditional matched filter cannot completely integrate the echo energy, the typical detection method is no longer applicable, and must be replaced by algorithms that detect range-spread targets. Over the past few decades, many studies have integrated the energies of the scattering cells and extracted the characteristics of the target signature  [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] [44] [45] [46] [47] [48] [49] [50] [51] [52] [53] [54] [55] . Some outcomes of these studies are elaborated below. First, the classical point-target detector was modified for range-spread targets by the energy integration detector and the M out of N (M/N ) detector. The typical scattering density dependent generalized likelihood ratio test (SDD-GLRT) detector  [39] , which consists of a nonlinear map followed by an integrator along the range cells, detects a range-spread target among white Gaussian noise. If the scattering density parameter is known, the performance of SDD-GLRT improves. However, the efficiency of SDD-GLRT solutions is decreased by the exponential and logarithmic operations. The M/N detector is a typical double-threshold detector of spatially distributed targets. Owing to its efficient structure, this detector can be easily realized in engineering and has been widely applied. Therefore, it has attracted much interest and has been often modified to improve its robustness and efficiency  [40, 41, 55] . Second is the adaptive detector, which utilizes multiple high-resolution range profiles (HRRPs) collected from consecutive pulses or antenna subarrays to cope with cluttered backgrounds  [42] [43] [44] [45] [46] [47] [48] [49] . The authors of  [42]  introduced a GLRT-based adaptive detector of range-spread targets in a partially uniform cluttered environment. The authors of  [45]  considered range-spread target detection in spherically invariant random-vector clutter, and developed different detectors with a constant false alarm rate by exploiting the order-statistics theory. In  [46] , a generalized matched subspace detector and a general adaptive subspace detector in the frequency domain were developed for range-spread targets with rangewalking in a partially homogeneous clutter. The authors of  [49]  developed adaptive decision schemes that reveal extended targets along with structured unwanted components in random interference (clutter and thermal noise). Third, to cope with the abundant information of the target signature, researchers have proposed range-spread target detectors using multiple HRRPs in various environments. These systems detect range-spread aircraft with maneuvering flights  [50] [51] [52] [53] [54] . The detector proposed in  [50]  is based on the cross time-frequency distribution features of two adjacently received signals, whereas that in  [51]  exploits the waveform entropy of the arithmetic average of multiple successive HRRPs. The detector in  [52]  uses a two-dimensional nonlinear shrinkage map related to the local statistics of a range-pulse image. The authors of  [53]  proposed a heuristic detector that exploits the characteristics of target HRRPs extracted from real target radar data. A range-spread target detector based on the time-frequency decomposition The number of points over Th1  of two adjacent mixer outputs using the cross S-method was devised in  [54] . Although some detectors of range-spread targets perform well, they are very time consuming and cannot be easily realized in engineering practice. We have extended the M/N detector to form the generalized likelihood ratio test double threshold (GLRT-DT)  [55] . To improve the robustness of the detector and avoid energy loss, we added a non-quantified accumulator to the M/N detector and adjusted the detection procedure accordingly. GLRT-DT performs well even when the number of scatterers and the target location are missing. The detector is robust and delivers high detection performance. The proposed detector is schematized in Figure  1 . The detection performances of GLRT-DT have been compared with those of the integrator detector, SDD-GLRT detector, and M/N detector in Monte Carlo simulations. The scattering center of the target can encounter four situations, as shown in Table  1 . Figure  2  shows the detection performances of the integral detector, M/N detector, SDD-GLRT detector, and GLRT-DT detector under the above parameters. As shown in the figure, the proposed detector significantly outperformed the integrator detector and M/N detector. Its performance even surpassed that of the SDD-GLRT detector in a sparse scattering environment, and approached that of the SDD-GLRT detector in a dense scattering environment. Therefore, the proposed detector robustly operates in both sparse and dense scattering environments.

High precision phase-derived velocity measurement technology
With the rapid development of radar technology, the application demands of high-precision ranging and target velocity measurements have increased in various fields. For example, micro-motion measurements  [33, 34, 56]  have always been active topics in target detection and recognition. However, owing to their small amplitudes and imprecise motion compensation, micro-motions are difficult to characterize. This bottleneck is most effectively broken through by improving the accuracy of the range and velocity measurements  [34, 57] . Theoretically, the precisions of the radar range and velocity measurements in conventional radar systems can be improved by increasing the signal bandwidth and integration time, respectively. However, increasing the signal bandwidth reduces the range resolution of the cells, whereas increasing the integration time increases the range migration. Therefore, the range migration of a high-sped target within the integration time exceeds the range resolution of the cell. Balancing large-signal bandwidths and long-time integration is usually a difficult task. Range and velocity measurement methods utilizing phase information have been developed since the 1970s. In the 2000s, Raytheon Company patented two methods of phase-derived range measurement (PDRM)  [30, 31] . The PDRM technique extends the measurement of the target motion from macro to micro, providing more effective characteristic reference information for target recognition. Inspired by the PDRM concept, we proposed PDVM, which measures the target velocity from the range rate of the target echoes between two adjacent frames  [58] . Figure  3  shows the implementation of the high-precision phase-derived range and velocity measurements. Because the range measurement represents the range increment between two adjacent frames, the velocity of the target can be measured at high precision by dividing the range increment by the time interval between the adjacent frames. Meanwhile, the high-precision PDRM of the target can be derived by summing the range increments of two adjacent frames. The range-increment measurements can be filtered after solving the ambiguity, further improving the accuracy of the range and velocity measurements. The measurement accuracy of the range increment between adjacent frames was simulated under different SNR conditions. The simulated envelope ranging measurement (EVM) and accuracies of the PDRM are shown in Figures  4  and 5 , respectively. In the SNR range 16-35 dB, the root mean squared  error (RMSE) reached the order of centimeters or millimeters in EVM and the order of millimeters or sub-millimeters in PDRM. The detection probability of the target decreased at SNRs below 16 dB. If the detection fails, the EVM and PDRM cannot be analyzed. In practice, when the joint target track information is obtained, PDR can be applied in lower-SNR environments. Subsequently, the PDVM technique has been applied to ISAR images  [59]  and micro-motion measurements  [35, 60] . We proposed a high-quality method that obtains ISAR images by compensating the target motion using accurate velocity information. The novel ISAR motion compensation approach has been conjugated with the PDVM technique to extract the micro-motion features of the target  [35] . The phase error induced by the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) was analyzed in  [61] , and a novel correction method for the phase unwrapping error under low-SNR conditions was developed in  [59] . 5 Range-spread target tracking technology HRR improves the accuracy, amount of target information, and performance of target-tracking in cluttered environments. In addition, tracking with a wideband waveform replaces the narrowband waveform of conventional tracking radars and reduces the waste of radar energy, which is important in radar system design. However, high-range resolution also reduces the SNR and introduces false alarms, placing greater performance demands on the data association module and tracking filtering module during tracking.  

Wideband waveform


High range resolution
A number of scatterers

Serious range migration


More range cells


More accuracy measurement


Target feature information
Low SNR Figure  6  shows the interrelationships among HRR characteristics. Uncertainties in measurement origins are often reduced by data association algorithms. The typical narrowband tracking theory and its algorithms are based on the point target model. The input observations are used for determining the existing tracks and for initiating a new track  [62] . However, HRRs resolve the target into many scattering cells, invalidating the typical narrowband tracking algorithm. The challenge in multiple range-spread target tracking is associating the observations, targets, and tracks. Multiple targets and scattering cells also cause a multiplication of observations, significantly increasing the computation complexity of data association (Figure  7 ).

More false alarms and missed detections


Abundant target information


Decrease tracking performance


Integrated detection and tracking algorithm
A traditional radar system is split into two independent subsystems-target detection and target tracking  [63]  -which are implemented in series. In detection, the Neyman-Pearson (NP) criterion is widely used to minimize the false alarm rate and maximize the detection probability. In tracking, the uncertainty in the measurement origin is reduced by data association algorithms such as the probabilistic data association filter (PDAF)  [64]  and the multiple hypothesis tracker  [62] . The traditional detection and tracking algorithm is illustrated in Figure  8 . However, optimizing the subsystems does not necessarily optimize the general system. This topic has attracted the attention of experts globally. To connect the detection and tracking subsystems, some researchers have proposed non-simulation performance prediction (NSPP) methods  [65] [66] [67] . The performance of the PDAF algorithm has been analyzed by methods based on the modified Riccati equation  [65, 66]  and the hybrid conditional average (HYCA)  [67] . Both methods characterize the impact of false alarms and missed detections during tracking by using the information reduction factor (IRF)  [68, 69] .  In recent efforts, the tracking algorithm based on NP detection has been improved and the joint optimization of detection and tracking has been considered  [70] . The optimization parameters in joint optimization are the detection probability and false alarm probability. The filtering performance (filtering covariance) is predicted and the detection parameters are optimized based on the NSPP result. Besides optimizing the detection threshold, some scholars have also analyzed the influence of radar waveform parameters on the tracking performance, and have proposed several optimization methods for these parameters  [71] [72] [73] [74] [75] . The authors of  [71]  proposed a dynamic waveform selection algorithm to strive for tracking error minimisation for manoeuvering target tracking in clutter. The proposed dynamic waveform selection algorithm can improve tracking performance considerably, especially in terms of track loss probability. The authors of  [72]  combined an autoregressive (AR) model into the Kalman filter for target tracking, and optimized the waveform by minimizing the Cramer-Rao lower bound for estimating the target range. After more in-depth research on this topic, the relevant theoretical results were summarized into a theoretical system of cognitive radar. Although the above method improves the tracking performance, some major problems must be resolved before the method is feasible in practice. First, IRF cannot be analytically expressed in terms of NP detection. Performance prediction requires a numerical calculation method, which is difficult to adapt to the high requirements of radar data processing in real time. Second, the target-feature information provided by the tracking module is not used in the detection process, meaning that the information flow remains unidirectional. Quite different to NP detection is Bayesian detection  [76] [77] [78] . The PDAF algorithm with Bayesian detection (PDAF-BD)  [76]  feeds back the filtered target-position information to the detection module and introduces a spatial variation threshold, reducing the false alarm rate and improving the detection and tracking performances. The Bayesian detector increases the information interaction between the tracking system modules, which suppresses the number of false alarms and is theoretically suitable for wideband radar. However, the cost of Bayesian detection and the pre-determined threshold of the detector are difficult to estimate. If the detector parameters are not properly selected, the tracking performance will be degraded. This problem largely limits the application of Bayesian detection. To mitigate these problems, we proposed an HYCA method for the PDAF-BD algorithm  [79] . For a  given scene and algorithm parameters, the HYCA method predicts the track loss probability and errors in the tracking algorithms at different times by observing the number of probability distributions and iterating the computation of the filtering covariance matrix. We also proposed an integrated detection and tracking algorithm based on Bayesian detection, which applies the performance prediction method  [80]  of the above PDAF-BD algorithm as a sub-module of the tracking algorithm. During the tracking process, the tracking performance under varying detection parameters is predicted from the tracking status of the current frame. The detection parameters are dynamically optimized to maximize the tracking performance. The integrated detection and tracking algorithm based on Bayesian detection is illustrated in Figure  9 .

Multiple target tracking with switching of attribute states
Multi-target tracking (MTT) attempts to relate the tracking to an observation. For this purpose, all possible associated events must be exhaustively considered by a "hard-association" class algorithm. This subsection presents two alternatives to exhaustive searching: indirect data-association and direct dataassociation. Figure  10  shows the differences between the two methods. (1) Indirect data-association method. The indirect data-association method reprocesses the rangespread target observations to obtain the center of the multiple scattering cells as the target observation. This method, which constitutes a type of "clustering" processing, is followed by target observation and track association. Koch  [81]  proposed a method that associates an observation with a target when the multiple rangespread targets are sparsely distributed. The observation-target association is completed by applying the nearest-neighbor method within an ellipse. Salmond  [82]  established the object-target affiliation by applying the Bayesian association method on the combined observations. The range-spread target association method is clear and reduces the computational complexity. Al-  though the classical multi-target association method directly processes the associated data, it does not form a closed-loop structure; rather, the information flows in the observation-target and target-track associations are unidirectional, meaning that the former cannot obtain the a priori information fed back by the latter. When the numbers of false alarms and missed detections are significant, the observationtarget association will largely deviate, decreasing the accuracy of the target-parameter estimation. These errors will accumulate over time and the target-track correlation process will eventually fail. The inability to improve the estimation using the time information, and to ensure the performance of the scattering point-target correlation, are the bottlenecks of the entire association process, restricting the performances of data-association methods to some extent. (2) Direct data-association method. The direct data-association method assigns multiple observations to a certain track at the same time. The assignment is based on the characteristics of the association between the range-spread target observation and the track  [83] . Therefore, such a method is directly extendible to the target-tracking problem of HRRs. The most representative method is the probabilistic multi-hypothesis tracker (PMHT) method based on the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm  [84] . Owing to its flexibility and scalability, PMHT has attracted the attention of scholars around the world and PMHT improvements have been actively sought in MTT theory. The accurate measurements and abundant target information of PMHT reduce the number of missed associations and improve the tracking performance. How to assist the association by exploiting the target-feature information is essential for improving the target tracking performance  [85, 86] . Previous studies have incorporated the feature information into PMHT  [87] [88] [89] [90] [91] [92] [93] [94] [95] [96] [97] . In some of these studies  [92] [93] [94] , the target is spatially expanded by the ellipsoid model and the tracking is assisted by the structural information of the target. The PMHT with classification measurements (PMHT-C) method assists the association using the target classification features within the PMHT framework  [95, 96] . The attribute measurements and targets are related through a matrix that is independent of time and observations. The method improves the correlation performance when the motion states are blurred. However, the matrix correlating the measured attributes and target features may change in practice. For example, the observed number of scattering points is not only affected by false alarm detections and fluctuations but also depends on the target attitude. The PMHT-C algorithm cannot cope with switching of the target-feature states, and its performance degrades in this circumstance. To resolve these problems, an EM-based attribute-aided tracking algorithm has been developed  [97] . Figure  11  is a flowchart of this attribute-aided tracking method. The attribute characteristics are de-scribed by a hidden Markov model and a joint probabilistic model of the kinematic and attribute properties is derived. Based on these derivations, an EM-based iterative algorithm is developed. The kinematic and attribute information in multiple frames is used for association and filtering. The performance of this algorithm improves when the target attributes are available.

ISAR imaging technology
The ISAR obtains range-Doppler images of non-cooperative moving targets. For this reason, it has become an attractive option in recent years. Using the relative rotational and translational motions between a target and the radar's line of sight, ISAR reconstructs a two-dimensional high-resolution image of the target. The desired relative motion is uniform rotational motion without translational motion. The undesired translational component causes range migration and phase modulation, both of which degrade the quality of the ISAR image  [98, 99] . Accordingly, this component is removed by a motion compensation technique. Complicated movements of a target involve nonuniform rotational motions. Therefore, well-focused ISAR images usually require rotational motion compensation (RMC) [106] proposed a new ISAR RMC method that formulates the polynomial phase signal of the dominant scatterer using the polynomial-phase transform.  Liu et al. [108]  proposed a novel estimation and compensation method that removes the nonuniform rotational motions of maneuvering targets, thereby compensating the nonlinear migration through the range cells and the high-order terms in the range-cell echoes. They constructed a rotational motion model with constant angular acceleration, and analyzed its influence on the image quality. The rotational motion parameters were estimated by particle swarm optimization. In addition, the unwanted translational motion of the target must be removed by reliable translational motion compensation (TMC)  [109] [110] [111] [112] [113] [114] [115] [116] . TMC methods, which include Doppler centroid tracking (DCT) [109], phase gradient autofocus (PGA)  [110, 111] , minimum entropy phase autofocus  [112] , and maximum contrast phase autofocus [112], estimate and compensate the phase error caused by translational motion. If the target's rotational motion can be ignored and no prominent point exists, the phase error estimation obtained by DCT becomes a maximum likelihood estimation  [109] . As the target's rotational motion cannot be ignored and prominent points may exist, the assumptions of DCT may be invalid in real applications. Instead, PGA integrates the information of several prominent scatterers to more precisely estimate the phase error in the translational motion  [110] . However, selecting the prominent scatterers is a difficult task. Recently, subspace algorithms based on eigenvalue decomposition (EVD) have been proposed  [113] [114] [115] [116] , which are robust and more effective for ISAR phase autofocus than PGA. More specifically,  Cao et al. [113]  proposed a minimum-entropy ISAR autofocus algorithm (MESA), which optimizes the weights of the principle eigenvectors by an iterative optimization method, and then estimates the phase error in the translational motion. Suppose that a relatively strong scatterer exists on the target. After constructing the EVD of the covariance matrix from the complex range-aligned echoes, the translational motion phase error can be estimated as the single eigenvector corresponding to the largest eigenvalue. This method is called single eigenvalue autofocus (SEA)  [114] . Recently, the efficiency of TMC has been improved by a new concept called eigenimage, which defines the fast Fourier transform output of the principal eigenvectors  [115] . However, the methods in  [113, 115]  require complicated iteration and optimization procedures. In addition, the computational complexity of EVD is of the order of O(M 3 ), where M is the dimension of the covariance matrix with respect to the number of pulse samples  [113] [114] [115] . To enhance the cross-range resolution of the given pulse repetition frequency, a larger observation pulse number is usually requested. Consequently, all of the above EVD-based autofocus methods are disadvantaged by the high computational complexity of processing the high-dimensional covariance matrix. To avoid the high computational complexity of EVD-based autofocus methods, the authors of  [116]  proposed an alternative approach that generates the covariance matrix more efficiently. First, HRRPs are obtained by compressing the original range. The data are then range-aligned and inserted into a matrix. Subsequently, the numbers of range bins are compared with those of pulse samples. If there are more range bins than pulse samples, the covariance matrix can be constructed by a conventional EVD-based method. Otherwise, the dimension of the covariance matrix can be reduced by transposing the range-aligned data matrix and performing successive phase autofocuses. This approach significantly reduces the computational complexity of EVD. Figure  12  is a flowchart of this alternative method. Airplane echo data have been recorded by an S-band experimental ISAR system. Using a stepped frequency signal with a synthetic bandwidth of 320 MHz, this experiment collected 256 pulses with an average pulse SNR of 16 dB in the range-aligned data. Figure  13  shows the results of DCT, PGA, and the modified SEA and MESA algorithms (M-SEA and M-MESA, respectively) on these real aircraft data. The targets in the ISAR images obtained by DCT and PGA (panels (c) and (d) of Figure  13 , respectively) are almost merged by noise. The focus qualities of the images obtained by M-MESA and M-SEA (panels (e) and (f) in Figure  13 , respectively) are vastly improved. The contrasts of ISAR images obtained by the four methods are compared in Table  2 . The higher the contrast, the better is the focus quality. In Table  2 , the contrast values of DCT and PGA were lower than those of M-MESA and M-SEA, consistent with the above discussion. Furthermore, M-MESA yielded a better result than M-SEA because M-MESA uses more eigenvectors that contribute to the signal subspace.   radar, and identifies the target using the a priori target information  [117] [118] [119] [120] [121] . A typical RATR system is divided into four modules: data acquisition, preprocessing, feature extraction, and selection (also known as classifier training or decision-making). The data used for identification are divided into training data and real data. The framework of RATR implementation is shown in Figure  14 . The RATR tasks can be classified into the following three levels: (1) Discrimination of target attributes such as the warheads, number of aircraft in the formation, satellites, and space debris [122]. (2) Determination of the targets, which may be helicopters, propellers, jets, wheeled and tracked vehicles, or other objects. (3) Determination of the target model, for example, jet aircraft Su-35 and F-22 and ground track vehicles T-90 and M1A2. RATR is gradually developed from low-level discrimination to high-level classification and identification. In general, the target becomes more difficult to identify as the level increments, requiring more target information and finer images.

HRRP attitude sensitivity problem
The HRRP of the target is the projection of the target scattering center in the direction of sight. HRRP, which reflects the geometric and structural features of the target, is among the main methods of wideband radar target recognition  [117, [123] [124] [125] [126] . The echo of each resolution cell of the target's HRRP is formed by superposing the echoes of multiple scattering centers in the resolution cell. When the target position changes relative to the radar's line of sight, the radial range of the scattering center also changes, causing a phase change of the echo. In turn, the phase change alters the vector superposition result and the shape of the HRRP appears to undulate. The sensitivity of HRRP to attitude variations increases with increasing (decreasing) carrying frequency (wavelength) of the wideband radar. When the angle of view varies significantly, the distribution of the scattering center in the sight direction may be significantly changed by the shielding effect, which may distinctly alter the HRRP. HRRP target recognition must resolve three main problems: orientation sensitivity, translation sensitivity, and amplitude sensitivity. Researchers worldwide have conducted in-depth research on these issues and proposed various solutions. Orientation sensitivity refers to the notable shape changes in HRRP for small changes in the orientation angle when there is relative rotation between the radar and the target. It is sourced from the relative change in the radial distance of each scattering point on the target, and is the most difficult and critical issue. At present, the main solution is to divide the HRRP sequence into several subsets, each covering a small range of orientation angles. A training template is then constructed for each subset, which can be considered as orientation-insensitive. Orientation sensitivity is usually relaxed by equally spacing the entire azimuthal domain; each angular domain is then analyzed by an analytical mathematical model  [127] . The authors of  [128]  adaptively divided the azimuthal domain using the factor analysis model and the Riemann manifold bending rate model, and calculated the average range profile to achieve target recognition.  The translation sensitivity problem is caused by the relative motion of the target and the radar, meaning that the relative position of the target range migrates within the length of the wave-gate window. Translation sensitivity is usually handled by one of the two methods: (1) alignment method, which mainly involves correlation alignment and absolute alignment, and (2) HRRP translation-invariant features. The commonly used features include the Fourier transform spectrum amplitude, bispectrum features, highorder spectral features [129], and central moment features  [130] . The amplitude sensitivity problem refers to the unfairness of the data in the subsequent classification and recognition. This problem is caused by the inconsistency in the magnitude-scale standards of the range image (due to differences between the radar and the target range, transmission power, antenna gain, and other uncontrollable phenomena). It is commonly solved by normalizing the amplitude based on measured criteria or by searching for the optimal amplitude-matching factor. Feature extraction must identify the information reflecting the essential attributes of the target, which form the basis of the classification. Table  3  shows the commonly employed features in HRRP recognition. The waveform features directly reflect the shape of HRRP. Typical waveform features include the scale, statistical, and structural features. The scale features reflect the radial length, number of scattering centers, and other scale properties of the target. The statistical features reflect the amplitude change information, and the structural features reflect the spatial distribution information of the scattering center. The transformation features are extracted by a specific transform of HRRP. The spectral and multi-scale features are obtained by a transform function (such as a Fourier or bispectrum transform) and a wavelet transform, respectively, and the subspace characteristics are formed by dimensionality reduction methods such as principal component analysis (PCA) and local linear embedding. However, the traditional HRRP feature-extraction method requires advanced human experience, and a universal set of features is difficult to form. In specific applications, feature extraction and selection often consume much manpower and time, largely restricting the application of HRRP recognition. In multi-feature recognition, we need to select the appropriate feature subset and construct the corresponding classifier that recognizes different targets in different environments. If all features are fused blindly, the dimension of the feature vector will be greatly increased, which not only increases the computation effort and storage but may also reduce the recognition performance. Moreover, features differ in their physical meanings and usages. A hierarchical recognition method handles different features by different classifiers. When designing classifiers at different levels, the classifier must be optimized by considering the physical meanings and statistical distributions of the features. For example, features such as target size and scattering center can be classified by a simple threshold discriminant classifier or a decision tree classifier, whereas the structural and statistical features of the scattering centers can be discriminated by a support vector machine classifier. Before making the final decision, the results of different classifiers can be combined by an ensemble classification method.  For adaptive feature extraction, we can exploit the end-to-end capability of deep neural networks. Deep learning avoids the high dependence of the traditional machine learning algorithm on human experience  [118] [119] [120] [121] . Deep neural networks include deep autoencoders, deep convolution neural networks, and deep recurrent neural networks. Among these, the deep convolution neural network is most commonly used. Figure  15  is a block diagram of HRRP recognition using a deep convolution neural network. The network includes a convolution layer, a pooling layer, and a fully connected layer. The stacked convolution layer and pooling layer map the original data directly to the high-level abstract features, which are then mapped to the target through the fully connected layer. The entire process requires no human intervention.

Applications of HRR


High-resolution monopulse precision-tracking test radar
Based on theoretical research of HRR algorithms, the Beijing Institute of Technology has developed an X-band high-resolution monopulse precision-tracking test radar. The main parameters of the system are shown in Table  4 . In January 2016, the wideband test radar successfully realized full-bandwidth closed-loop tracking of civil aircraft in real time, and verified the key technologies of signal processing and data processing in wideband detection, tracking, high-precision measurement, imaging, and other procedures. As an important test platform, the wideband radar provides continuously measured data support for subsequent wideband detection and tracking research. Figure  16  is a photograph of the X-band wideband test radar. The X-band wideband radar records the echo data of an Airbus A320 airplane. The bandwidth of the wideband signal is 500 MHz. Initially, the radar system is led to the target by optical or ADS-B guidance. Once the radar system has captured the target, it switches to monopulse automatic tracking.  The adjustment amount required for envelope alignment was computed from the PDVM results of frames 513-768 in the ISAR echo data. The ISAR imaging results of the civil aircraft were obtained after TMC and are plotted in Figure  20 .

Foreign object debris high-resolution radar
Wideband radar target-recognition technology can detect foreign object debris (FOD) on airport runways. FOD defines any foreign material, debris, or object that may damage the aircraft in the operational airport area. If not removed, FOD can damage the aircraft at the most critical stage of the flight (taxiing and takeoff), resulting in catastrophic losses. Traditional FOD detection relies on human vision, which is poor-quality and inefficient. The flight capacity can be improved by installing photoelectric equipment, but such automated photo-detection is degraded by bad weather conditions (such as rain, fog, and haze). In recent years, the millimeter wave (MMW) radar has shown promising performance in FOD detection. MMW radar operates under both daytime and nighttime conditions, is highly to small foreign objects, has high positioning   accuracy for both distance and angle, and is strongly adaptable to bad-weather conditions. Moreover, when combined with photoelectric equipment and Beidou positioning equipment, the MMW radar can position and report FOD with high accuracy and high speed, greatly improving the quality and efficiency of detection, and hence, the safety and navigation ability of the airport operation. The FOD detection radar developed by the Beijing Institute of Technology is a high-resolution W-band radar using a linear frequency-modulated continuous wave, as shown in Figure  21 . Panels (a), (b), and (c) of Figure  22  show the measured HRRPs of the aircraft, ground vehicles, and foreign objects, respectively. These objects can be distinguished by their scale-structure characteristics, realizing automatic target recognition.

Dual polarization high-resolution radar
Combined with polarization measurements, high-resolution imaging technology can capture the distribution of the "spatial-polarimetric" scattering characteristics of a target. From this information, one can extract the spatial structure of the target and the characteristics of polarization scattering, and form the shape features of the target structure. This dual technology holds great potential in radar target recognition  [131] [132] [133] . Polarization measurement methods are divided into full polarization and dual polarization modes. Full polarization obtains the whole polarimetric scattering matrix, but requires complex hardware, waveform design, and signal processing. At present, full polarization has been applied in spaceborne SAR, shipborne radars, and GBRs. The dual polarization mode measures a single column of the target polarization scattering matrix. Although dual polarization provides less information than the full polarization radar, it provides more target information than traditional single-polarization radar while reducing the hardware complexity of the system. The dual polarized high-resolution radar developed by the Beijing Institute of Technology uses a stepped frequency chirp signal in the W-band  [134] . The maximum synthetic bandwidth is 1.2 GHz. Figure  23  shows the dual polarized HRRPs and polarization characteristics of houses and vehicles collected by this radar. The HRRPs of both targets have certain similarities and are difficult to distinguish with reliability. However, their extracted polarization features are well separated, meaning that both targets are reliably identified in the dual polarization mode. 

Summary and prospects
HRRs can potentially improve the detection ability of space targets in complicated environments. They improve the accuracy of target detection, obtain more feature information of the target, and are more aware of the environment than traditional radars, highlighting the feasibility of diverse and intelligent signal processing algorithms in radar applications. However, to satisfy diverse military and civilian needs, HRR performance must be further improved. This paper reviewed the latest research on HRRs, including target detection, tracking, imaging, and recognition by HRRs. It also discussed the relevant issues and solutions and analyzed the representative HRR systems, exemplifying them by experimental results. An HRR efficiently suppresses the target RCS fluctuations, angular glint, clutter, and other interferences, and is regarded as the direction of radar research and development. However, its resolution remains insufficient for general applications and the bandwidth should suit the scattering characteristics of the specific target. Resolving these problems will be the focus of future research. Judging from the existing methods of high-resolution signal processing, we anticipate that more attractive and effective methods will be proposed in the future, enabling the HRR tracking of complex targets in complex environments. Innovations in this field will boost the development and applicability of HRRs.