Introduction
An extensive amount of research has been focused on developing a viable, safe and efficient technique for hydrogen storage. Most importantly, various hydrogen storage materials, such as the light metal hydride and their complexes, have been extensively explored over the recent years. 1, 2 Among these materials, aluminium hydride (AlH 3 ) is one of the most promising candidates due to its high theoretical hydrogen storage capacity (10.08 wt. %) and low decomposition temperature (100-200 °С).  [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8]  Compared to other metal hydride or hydrogen storage materials, AlH 3 is an ideal candidate for a wide array of applications, such as solid rocket propellant and hydrogen-fuel cells.  [9] [10] [11]  Hence, several research groups have investigated the synthesis methods and hydrogenstorage performance of AlH 3 polymorphs.  4, 5, [12] [13] [14] [15] [16]  In 1969, Turley and Rinn, firstly, confirmed the crystal structure of α-AlH 3 phase, which crystallizes in a trigonal space group with a hexagonal unit cell.  12  Afterwards, other structural variations of AlH 3 polymorphs (α′, β, γ, δ, ε, ζ, orthorhombic Cmcm and cubic F 3 dm) were reported by various research groups.  [13] [14] [15] [16]  Among these polymorphs, the α-AlH 3 is recognized as the most stable and, consequently, the most investigated phase. The α-AlH 3 is stable at room temperature, whereas thermodynamically at a higher temperature (150 °C) with an equilibrium decomposition pressure of 10 kbar.  14  Recently, the α-polymorph, has an interatomic Al-H distance that is between that expected for ionic and covalent bonding and therefore has become one of the most researched binary metal hydrides.  [12] [13] [14]  Additionally, the dehydriding capacity and temperature of α-AlH 3 are well above the threshold, set by US Department of Energy (DOE) 2015. The target hydrogen storage requirement of 9 wt. % can also be achieved by controlling the particle size or hybridizing with other metal hydrides, such as LiH and MgH 2 .

4, 5
Developing cost-effective and efficient synthesis approaches for α-AlH 3 remain key issues and limit the practical utilization of this material. Apart from the structural investigations, Brower et al. have synthesized the non-solvated AlH 3 through an organometallic synthesis route in 1967.  17  By adding LiAlH 4 and AlCl 3 into the ether and heating the resulting AlH 3 . nEt 2 O at 65 °С for 6.5 h under vacuum, the α-AlH 3 can be preferentially formed according to the Eqn. (1). 3LiAlH 4(sln) +AlCl 3 (sln) +4nEt 2 O→4AlH 3 . nEt 2 O (sln) +3LiCl↓ (1) It was later discovered by Bulychev et al. that the α-AlH 3 could be directly synthesized by use of Lewis and a Bronsted acid as reagents and crystallizing from diethyl ether-benzene solutions, the reactions are expressed in Eqns. (  2 ) and (3). 18, 19 However, the abovementioned method for α-AlH 3 synthesis is highly sensitive to the temperature and time and not suitable for large-scale AlH 3 production. 6MAlH 4(s) +7Al 2 Br 6 (sln) →8AlH 3 ↓+6MAl 2 Br 7 (2) 2LiAlH 4 +H 2 SO 4 →2AlH 3 +Li 2 SO 4 +H 2 (3) It has been reported that the mechanochemical synthesis process is under the umbrella of green chemistry and is a sustainable method to synthesize metal hydrides due to favorable solid-state reactions during ball milling. For instance, Kim et    21  Birke et al. have suggested that the mechanochemical method offers distinct economic benefits, such as a low energy of consumption and utilization of cost-effective reagents.  22  Moreover, it has been demonstrated by Tigineh et al. that the mechanochemical process is solvent-free and consumes less energy, which makes them greener and sustainable than the conventional solution-based processes.  23  Furthermore, Park et al. have demonstrated that the dry-nature of the mechanochemical method makes it compatible with the current push to greenchemistry alternatives by avoiding the use of expensive and hazardous organic solvents during the synthesis process.  24  Thus, this method is considered as a powerful tool to employ solid-state reactions for metal hydrides synthesis. Based on the drawbacks of above-mentioned wet chemical techniques, Brinks et al. have employed a mechanochemical method to synthesize AlH 3 .  14  It has been demonstrated that the AlH 3 /LiCl composite can be synthesized by a mechanically assisted reaction, between LiAlH 4 and AlCl 3 at room temperature and 77 K.  14  The reaction can be described by Eqn. (4). 3LiAlH 4(s) +AlCl 3(s) →4AlH 3 +3LiCl (4) Lately, Sartori et al. have discovered that the yield of AlH 3 can be increased to 49.9 mol % by using NaAlH 4 , as a reagent, and FeF 3 , as a catalyst.  25  It has been demonstrated by Paskevicius et al.  26  that the AlH 3 can be formed via a mechanochemical reaction of LiAlH 4 and AlCl 3 at lower or room temperature, which results in several polymorphs (α-, α'-, and γ -AlH 3 ) with the crystalline size of 15 -17 nm. Nevertheless, this work was solely focused on the mechanochemical synthesis of AlH 3 composite rather than aiming for a specific crystal structure. The as-milled AlH 3 , with some variations in its crystal structures, ultimately leads to the complexity of the extraction. This solid state mechanochemical method has also been adopted for use by other researchers to produce nanosized α-AlH 3 composite.  [27] [28] [29] [30] [31]  Because of its widespread use, it is evident that mechanochemical method is a valid and wellestablished method for the synthesis of nano-sized α-AlH 3 composite. However, it has been reported that the metallic Al forms during the room temperature ball milling, which can be partially attributed to the heterogeneity of solid-state reaction and leads to the decomposition of AlH 3 . Though the cryo-milling process has the potential to prevent the AlH 3 from dehydriding, the much lower temperature also raises technical challenges on large-scale production of α-AlH 3 . Ionic liquids (ILs) are considered as promising environmentfriendly solvents in organic synthesis and offer distinct advantages, such as non-flammability, low volatility, low toxicity and high thermal and chemical stability. 32, 33 ILs are also extremely important because they can be used as a solvent in catalyst-free reactions. To date, series of catalyst-free reactions are employed and completed in ILs due to the ease of the experimental procedure, low cost and eco-friendly process. 34, 35 Due to the advantages offered by ILs over traditional approaches, we aimed to employ ILs solvent to synthesize α-AlH 3 . In order to stabilize the obtained α-AlH 3 during the mechanochemical process, the selection of ionic liquid is critical. Compared with acidic ionic liquids, the neutral ILs are more suitable for synthesis of α-AlH 3 because the protonic acid is eliminated and the mechanochemical reaction can be performed at a lower temperature under neutral conditions. To overcome the heterogeneity of the solid state reaction and stabilize the synthesized α-AlH 3 during the mechanochemical process, the [2-Eim] OAc ionic liquid has been induced as the efficient neutral media. Enormous interest in α-AlH 3 has urged us to explore green and straightforward mechanochemical route. Herein, we propose a sustainable and green synthesis process for α-AlH 3 by employing liquid state reaction milling process and using cheap metal hydrides and aluminum chloride as reagents. In the present investigation, the LiH/AlCl 3 and MgH 2 /AlCl 3 are considered as the reaction system, separately. The [2-Eim] OAc (2-ethyl imidazolium acetate) is used as an efficient neutral media ionic liquid for α-AlH 3 synthesis. The proposed synthesis approach is more sustainable, convenient and eco-friendly than the previously reported methods. Furthermore, the effective utilization of cost-efficient raw materials, such as LiH and AlCl 3 , the catalyst-free synthesis and low energy consumption indicate the distinct advantages of the applied synthesis process. For instance, the LiH utilized in this study is cheaper than LiAlH 4 . As a conventional raw materials, LiH was always be used for producing LiAlH 4 . In contrast, the conventional method for synthesizing AlH 3 is conducted in ether solvent using LiAlH 4 and AlCl 3 as reagents and the whole process is not sustainable and green. In addition, the MgH 2 was prepared by milling cheap Mg powder under lower hydrogen pressure, which is a green process with high energy efficiency and does not require hazardous solvents.  36  The synthesis of α-AlH 3 nano-composite was carried out by milling AlCl 3 and LiH powders in hydrogen, without any catalyst. Moreover, the utilized [2-Eim] OAc ionic liquid is ecofriendly and facilitates the stabilization of AlH 3 . The adopted lower ball-to-powder ratio results in less energy consumption, which makes this process more sustainable. Furthermore, Paskevicius et al. have demonstrated the synthesis of several polymorphs of AlH 3 (α-, α'-, β-, and γ -AlH 3 ) via a chemical reaction between LiAlH 4 and AlCl 3 at 77 K and RT.  26  However, in our proposed method, the α-AlH 3 phase can be directly obtained during ball milling, which facilitates of the following extraction. As outlined by thermodynamic processes, the Gibbs free energy change for the reactions between LiH and AlCl 3 , MgH 2 and AlCl 3 are calculated from the Eqns (5) and (6). The Gibbs free energy changes for the reactions from 273K to 373K are both less than 0 kJ/mol, as shown in Fig.  S1 , which indicates that these reactions can take place at room temperature. However, according to the reaction kinetics, the feasibility of the mechanochemical reaction has to be experimentally demonstrated by ball milling. 3LiH+AlCl 3 →3LiCl+AlH 3 (5) 3MgH 2 +2AlCl 3 →2AlH 3 +3MgCl 2 (6)

Experimental
The nanocrystalline MgH 2 (self-made, 99%), LiH (Sigma Aldrich, 97%), AlCl 3 (Sigma Aldrich, 99%) and [2-Eim] OAc were employed as starting reagents and solvent to synthesize α-AlH 3 composite. The nanocrystalline MgH 2 powder was prepared by mechanochemical reaction between Mg powder and H 2 , as reported previously. Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins LiH, AlCl 3 and [2-Eim] OAc were used without any further purification (refer to ESI, Fig.  S2  and S3 ). Due to the high sensitivity of the reagents and as-milled products to moisture content, all manipulations including charging and discharging of vials throughout experiments were conducted in an Ar-filled gloves box, with oxygen and water content of less than 5 and 2 ppm, respectively. For a typical mechanochemical reaction, the reagents, LiH/AlCl 3 and MgH 2 /AlCl 3 as well as [2-Eim] OAc were weighed and mixed in the various molar ratios(3:1, 4:1, 6:1, 9:1 and 3:2) and transferred to a high-pressure planetary type ball milling machine (QM-SP4), with 500 cm 3 ball milling chamber. The reaction mixture was sealed into the container under Ar atmosphere in gloves box. The argon atmosphere was purged twice, with zero grade H 2 , before the container was finally pressurized to 5 MPa H 2 pressure. During the mechanochemical reaction, the ball to powder mass ratio were 20, 40 and 60:1 and high-energy milling was carried out for various time intervals at 200 rpm. The abovementioned ball to powder ratio is lower than the study carried out by Sartori et al., where the ball to powder ratio was 200:1.  25, 30  The lower ball to powder ratio results in less energy consumption, which makes it more sustainable. To keep the average temperature in the vial as close to room temperature as possible, the milling sequence was altered every twenty minutes, with an intermittent pause of ten minutes. After completion of the mechanochemical reaction, the as-milled product was filtered and distilled in a vacuum. The crude ionic liquid [2-Eim] OAc was washed with diethyl ether and dried in a vacuum oven at 80 °C for further experiments. To study the dehydriding properties of as-milled samples, dehydriding measurements were carried out on a home-made special vacuum apparatus. The as-milled powder was loaded into a stainless steel holder. The evacuated volume inside the apparatus can reach up to 1×10 -2 Pa, at the initial stages of isothermal desorption measurements. In order to investigate the dehydriding kinetics of composite systemically, the as-milled samples were powdered at different temperatures of 80, 120, 140 and 160 °C. The time required for the full dehydriding reaction was fixed at 6.5 × 10 3 s. The amount of hydrogen decomposed from the composite was measured and calculated in terms of the vial vacuum change. Based on the H 2 pressure change, the ideal gas equation, as well as the stoichiometric weight of AlH 3 calculated by the chemical reaction, the content of AlH 3 in nanocomposite, could be obtained. The dehydriding curves of the AlH 3 nano-composite were obtained. The differential thermal analysis measurements were performed by using a TG-DSC METTLER TOLEDO instruments. The samples were handled and transferred to the instrument in T-zero pans and heated from 50 to 280 • C, by using different heating rates. In order to prevent the air exposure, the composite was sealed in an aluminum crucible. The X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) analysis of the as-milled products was performed by using a diffractometer, equipped with a graphite monochromator and rotating anode tube, operating with Cu Kα radiation source at 45 kV and 40 mA. The XRD patterns were collected by using step scanning mode, at a rate of 0.5°/min, in the 2θ range of 10 -90°. The average grain size of the α-AlH 3 phase (G) was obtained by using Scherrer formula according to the following equation: θ β λ cos k D = (7) Where D represents the average grain size, k is a constant with a value of 0.89, λ corresponds to the applied X-ray wavelength (λ Cu-Kα = 1.54 Å), β is defined as the half-width after subtracting for the instrumental broadening and θ corresponds to the diffraction angle of the diffraction peak. The solid-state NMR experiments were carried out at 14.1 T magnet on a Bruker Avance NMR spectrometer, equipped with a magic angle spinning probe head for rotors of 2.5 mm diameter. Due to the air and moisture sensitivity of the materials used in experiments, all the solid samples were packed into a 2.5 mm ZrO 2 rotor in a gloves box under argon atmosphere. To maximize quantitative accuracy, the direct polarization spectra were spun under 20 KHz to identify the resonances and spinning sidebands. The chemical shift scale was referenced externally with potassium alum to -0.033 ppm as a secondary reference, and recycle delay for 27   Al was set to 3 sec. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis was carried out on the JEOL JEM2011 apparatus. For TEM observations, the powders were loaded onto the carbon support films, with 200 mesh copper grids. It should be noted that the asmilled products, mixed with [2-Eim] OAc, were filtrated and dried in a vacuum oven before dehydriding, TEM and NMR measurements.

Results and discussion


Selection of mechanochemical reaction reagents
The solid-state synthesis of alane via mechanochemical reaction of LiH or MgH 2 precursors with AlCl 3 has been demonstrated as an efficient and green method of producing adduct-free AlH 3 in large quantities.  5, 26, 31, [37] [38] [39] [40]  Hlova et al.  31  have found that the amorphous AlH 3 can be formed by milling LiH and AlCl 3 at room temperature. Moreover, the successful synthesis of γ-AlH 3 /MgCl 2 nano-composite has been demonstrated by solid-state milling of nanocrystalline MgH 2 and AlCl 3 , which is also a cost-effective method to obtain γ-AlH 3 nano-composite.  [37] [38] [39] [40]  However, the formation of α phase has not been demonstrated by above reports mentioned. Based on the previous investigation, the MgH 2 /AlCl 3 and LiH/AlCl 3 as the reaction systems are employed and introduced into ILs to synthesize α-AlH 3 . Fig.  1  shows the XRD patterns of the MgH 2 and AlCl 3 , with a ratio of 3:2, milled in [2-Eim] OAc for different time intervals. As suggested by the XRD patterns, an amorphous-like background between 10° to 20° can ascribe to the [2-Eim] OAc, which was used as a solvent in the mechanochemical synthesis of AlH 3 . Only the diffraction peaks, corresponding to Mg(AlH 4 ) 2 and MgCl 2 were found at milling time = 1 hrs, which result suggests that the following reaction has occurred initially (Eqn.8). This is mainly due to the higher chemical reactivity of nanocrystalline MgH 2 (Fig.  S2 ). It also indicates that the formation of Mg(AlH 4 ) 2 requires lower activation energy, as compared to the AlH 3 , synthesized in [2-Eim] OAc. Even with prolonged reaction times, the XRD patterns did not indicate the presence of AlH 3 traces (Fig.  1 b  and c ). However, the Mg(AlH 4 ) 2 was still found to be a major phase in the as-milled product. This phenomenon is in good agreement with the previously published report,  41  where Mg(AlH 4 ) 2 was obtained by ball milling MgH 2 and AlCl 3 in a molar ratio of 3:2 at low temperature. Moreover, the grain This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins size of Mg(AlH 4 ) 2 , obtained after 2.5h milling, reduced to 32 nm. It can be concluded that Mg(AlH 4 ) 2 phase has transformed into a nano-crystallite form. Based on above analysis, it can be concluded that it is difficult to obtain AlH 3 by mechanochemical reaction of MgH 2 with AlCl 3 in [2-Eim] OAc. Hence, LiH was used to replace MgH 2 . 4MgH 2 +2AlCl 3 →2AlH 3 +MgH 2 +3MgCl 2 →Mg(AlH 4 ) 2 +3MgCl 2 (8) Fig.  2  shows the XRD patterns of fresh samples, prepared by ball milling a mixture of LiH and AlCl 3 (3:1) in [2-Eim] OAc for different time intervals. After milling for 1 h, the diffraction peaks corresponding to the starting reagents were still observed, which indicates that the AlH 3 cannot be synthesized under this condition. When milling time was increased to 2 h, the observed diffraction peaks correspond to the starting reagents (LiH and AlCl 3 ) and LiAlH 4 . Even at a milling time of 2.5 h, the formation of AlH 3 was not observed (Fig.  2c ). However, an alternate crystalline phase, LiAlH 4 , has formed during the ball milling. It can be concluded that the LiH and AlCl 3 have reacted to form LiAlH 4 , instead of AlH 3 . It is worth noting that molar ratio in these experiments was fixed at 3:1. It has been reported that AlH 3 can be formed by mechanochemical reaction of Li precursors (LiAlH 4 and LiH) if the mole ratio of reagent is chosen properly. 5, 38 Therefore, we aimed to optimize the synthesis process by varying the molar ratios, ball to powder ratio, the mill shaft rotation speed and milling time to obtain α-AlH 3 by mechanochemical process.

Determination of mechanochemical reaction conditions
Based on above analysis, when a stoichiometric 3:1 molar mixture was used to start the reaction, the LiAlH 4 is formed during the ball milling. The effect of molar ratio (4:1, 6:1 and 9:1) was studied by changing the relative amount of LiH and AlCl 3 . Fig.  3  displays the XRD patterns of LiH with various ratio of AlCl 3 milled for 1h, with the ball to powder mass ratio of 40:1. When the ratio was fixed at 4:1, the results were similar to those prepared by milling the LiH/AlCl 3 mixture with a ratio of 3:1, but it appeared that the reaction process had been accelerated. Complete reaction of LiH and AlCl 3 with the formation of LiAlH 4 was achieved on milling the mixture for 1h. Therefore, the ball-to-powder ratio is regarded as an important parameter during the mechanochemical process, which can effectively enhance the chemical reactivity between the reagents. The complexity and uniqueness of the mechanochemical reaction, with respect to the precursors, indicates that the above result may not be fully applicable to the LiH-AlCl 3 system, which motivated us to carry out an in-depth investigation on the ratio of reagents. When initial reactions between LiH and AlCl 3 were performed for different molar ratios (4:1 to 6:1), it can be readily observed that the LiAlH 4 , Li 3 AlH 6 and LiCl were major products (Fig.  3 ). The presence of LiAlH 4 and Li 3 AlH 6 , after 1 h of ball milling, can be explained by the following reaction (Eqn 9).  42  As shown in Fig.  3 , for the starting mixture of 9:1, only Li 3 AlH 6 , LiCl and unreacted LiH diffraction peaks were observed. Thus, it can be concluded that the excess of Li hydride source leads to the formation of Li 3 AlH 6 . This observation is in good agreement with our previous investigation, where Li 3 AlH 6 was observed as the final product.  38  2LiH + LiAlH 4 → Li 3 AlH 6 (9) Hlova et al.  31  have reported a transformation pathway for synthesizing AlH 3 , where the solid-state mechanochemical reaction can be controlled by step-wise addition of AlCl 3 to the initial reaction mixture. In order to obtain AlH 3 by mechanochemical reaction of LiH with AlCl 3 , the same pathway was adopted in our present investigation. During the second stage of the reaction process, 1/3 molar equivalents of AlCl 3 were added to the products obtained from the 4:1 reaction of LiH and AlCl 3 (LiAlH 4 , LiCl at τBM = 60 min) to reach the desired ratio of 3:1. Fig.  4  demonstrates the XRD patterns of the LiAlH 4 /LiCl composite with a mixture of AlCl 3 milled for 20, 40, 60 and 80 min, and with the same ball to powder mass ratio as previously mentioned. It can be seen from that the diffraction peaks corresponding to the unreacted AlCl 3 , along with the previously present LiCl and LiAlH 4 , were observed after 20 minutes of milling. This could be ascribed to the incomplete reaction of LiAlH 4 and AlCl 3 . It is noted that a new set of diffraction peaks appeared at 28-29° and 48°, which could be unambiguously assigned to LiAlCl 4 . This result is in good agreement with the previously published literature.  43  Upon further milling for 60 min, the peaks of LiAlH 4 , LiAlCl 4 and AlCl 3 phase disappeared from the XRD patterns and the complete mechanochemical reaction has been achieved. Meanwhile, there was a change in the mixtures for the as-milled samples, reacted between 20 and 60 min, as compared to the starting precursors. The intensities of the peaks between 10° and 20° gradually increased, indicating that an amorphous intermediate has formed. According to the latest report,  31  it has been demonstrated that LiH/AlCl 3 reagents may undergo an amorphization stage before the final AlH 3 phase formation. Thus, with the increased milling time, the crystallization and stabilization of the intermediate phase have been achieved (Fig.  4 ). From XRD pattern of the as-milled samples, milled for 60 min, it is obvious that the crystallization of α, γ-AlH 3 was achieved. This phenomenon also demonstrates that the formation of α and γ phases is more favorable than other less stable phases. With prolonged reaction time, it can be concluded that only α-AlH 3 phase was eventually formed and transformed into a nano-crystallite form. The crystallite size, calculated from XRD patterns, demonstrated that the average crystallite size of the α-AlH 3 phase obtained by 80 min milling could reach 128 nm. From the XRD patterns, it can be observed that no impurity phase was present in the final as-milled products. This may be attributed to the stabilization of the [2-Eim] OAc, which can not react with a product, such as AlH 3 or LiCl during the milling process. In order to obtain α-AlH 3 composite as the final product in a short milling time, the as-milled LiAlH 4 /LiCl mixture was milled with a ratio of 60:1 for various time intervals. When milled for 20 min, the intensity of the peaks, assigned to LiAlH 4 and AlCl 3, decreased significantly, suggesting that the decrement of reagents and the increment of the mechanochemical reaction extent (Fig.  5 ). In addition, it can be seen that no diffraction peaks of LiAlH 4 and AlCl 3 were detected in the sample milled for 40 min. It appeared from Fig.  5  that the complete reaction of LiAlH 4 and AlCl 3 , with the formation of α-AlH 3 , has been achieved in final milling stage. It can be concluded that the ball-to-powder ratio is an important parameter, which effectively increases the reaction kinetics and decreases the reaction time to form α-AlH 3 nano-composite. When the milling time was increased to 60 min, the final crystallite size of α-AlH 3 reduced to 56 nm. In short, the adopted mechanochemical pathway can be regarded as a green and simple way to synthesize α-AlH 3 nano-composite by step-wise addition of AlCl 3 into LiH Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins reaction system. Furthermore, the elimination of hazardous solvents from the synthesis process is the distinct advantage of this process.

Identification of as-milled powders
To confirm the XRD results and the existence of an amorphous phase in the as-milled product, the sequence of events during the mechanochemical process (stage II) was also monitored by NMR spectroscopy. The as-milled samples during the mechanochemical process were characterized by  27  Al DPMAS spectroscopy, which is shown in Fig.  6 . It can be seen that a peak centered around -2 ppm was detected in Fig.  6a , which can be ascribed to the presence of AlCl 3 . This indicates that AlCl 3 was not entirely consumed within the first 20 min of milling. The dominant spectral band around 100 ppm (Fig.  6a ) represents the resulting four-coordinated (Al The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is uniquely suited to study the phase transition at nano-scale.  46  It has been demonstrated by Nakagawa et al. that the a-AlH 3 can be clearly identified from the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern.  7  Moreover, it has been reported that AlH 3 is stable under the electron beam. 37, 38 Thus, TEM observation and associated SAED patterns were monitored and these results indicate the presence of α-AlH 3 and LiCl phases in as-milled products. It can be seen from Fig.  7  that the crystallization of α-AlH 3 was complete at following the end of the milling stage. Furthermore, Fig.  7a  shows that the average grain size of α-AlH 3 was 56 nm after 60 min milling. This result is in good agreement with our previous work, where only AlH 3 and LiCl phases were observed in XRD patterns. The typical lattice spacings of 0.323, 0.234 and 0.222 nm correspond to the (012), (  104 ) and (110) planes of α-AlH 3 , respectively (Fig.  7b ). Moreover, the corresponding SAED patterns (Fig.  7b ) indicate the crystalline nature of nanocomposite with (111), (  200 ), (  220 ) and (400) planes of the LiCl. The morphology of α-AlH 3 nanoparticles is similar to the results of TEM investigations carried out by Paskevicius et al.,  26  where the product consists of α-AlH 3 nanoparticles embedded in a LiCl by-product.

De-hydriding property of α-AlH 3 composite
Fig.  8  shows the dehydriding kinetics of the as-milled α-AlH 3 composite at various temperatures and time intervals. It is noteworthy that the dehydriding content is calculated by dividing actual hydrogen content by the stoichiometric AlH 3 weight. As seen from Fig.  8 , all the isothermal dehydriding curves present sigmoidal features with introduction, acceleration and decay periods. The results indicate that the rate of dehydrogenation accelerated as the temperature rose to 160 °C. Additionally, from the dehydrogenation curves, it can be conjectured that dehydriding temperature has a remarkable effect on the dehydrogenation reaction of α-AlH 3 /LiCl composite, which can be expressed by Eqn. (10). AlH 3 →2Al+3H 2 ↑ (10) When the dehydriding temperature was fixed at 80 °C for 2.84*10 3 s, it can be seen from the Fig.  8a  that the hydrogen desorption content of as-milled product reached merely 2.0 wt. %, indicating the partial dehydriding reactions. Although the dehydriding curves exhibited an undesirable property, the as-milled product still has an advantage in dehydriding properties, compared to the much lower hydrogen content of 1.9 wt. % derived from the as-milled AlH 3 , which entirely decomposed from room temperature to 200 °C. 5 Furthermore, the value described above, is higher than the 0.48 wt. % hydrogen content of crude α-AlH 3 , measured by Graetz. et al. 6, 8, 47   By increasing the reaction temperature to 120 °C, the hydrogen content of α-AlH 3 composite increased rapidly to 7.29 wt. %, suggesting that a large part of AlH 3 decomposed at a higher temperature. Furthermore, 9.93 wt. % of hydrogen desorption could be obtained by heating the reaction mixture at 140 °C for the same time, which implies that the dehydrogenation rate has a direct relationship with the temperature. Afterwards, the as-milled composite was annealed at 160 °C for 860 s and the hydrogen content reached a maxima up to 9.93 wt. %, which is quite close to the theoretical hydrogen storage capacity (10.08 wt. %) of pure AlH 3 . It is worth mentioning that the AlH 3 , prepared by the organometallic method,  48  can only release 8.0 wt. % of H 2 in the temperature range of 20-160 °C. Although the freshly synthesized nanoscale α-AlH 3 has an enhanced dehydrogenation property, it has been reported by Graetz et al. that the complete decomposition at 138°C can be achieved even within 1800 s.  49  Therefore, it can be concluded that nano-structured α-AlH 3 composite, characterized by much finer grain size, exhibits excellent dehydriding performance. Though, the dehydriding temperature of the α-AlH 3 nanocomposite is higher than usual and lower dehydriding temperature is favorable in hydrogen storage materials. However, it has been demonstrated by Graetz et    54  which has shown that the decomposition kinetics of AlH 3 can be accelerated by LiH doping. We suggest that if LiCl can be fully separated from this composite, the obtained pure AlH 3 doped with LiH will have an excellent dehydriding property and can be used as an onboard hydrogen storage material. In order to get a deep insight into the dehydriding process of the α-AlH 3 /LiCl nano-composite, further evidence was obtained by the DSC curves. Fig.  9  the DSC curves of the as-milled α-AlH 3 composite at several heating rates. It can be clearly observed that as-milled α-AlH 3 curves contain only one endothermic peak, at an elevated temperature of 50 -280 °C, corresponding to the α-AlH 3 decomposition and consistent with published literature. 51, 55, 56   Liu et al. have found that the endothermic peak between 80 and 190 °C can be assigned to the dehydriding reaction of the α phase. 55, 56 instance, for as-milled α-AlH 3 composite with a heating rate ranging from 15 to 3 °C/min, the corresponding absolute temperature reduced from 157.4 °C to 121.6 °C. To further explore the dehydrogenation property of α-AlH 3 nano-composite, the dehydriding kinetics of α-AlH 3 /LiCl were investigated by Kissinger's method (Eq. 11), particularly in terms of apparent activation energy (E a ).

ln(c/T
2 p ) = -(E a /RT p )+A (11) Where c corresponds to the heating rate, T p represents the absolute temperature, corresponding to the maximum desorption rate, R refers to the universal gas constant and A is a constant. Fig.  9b  shows the activation energy of the dehydriding reaction based on parameters obtained from the DSC measurements (Fig.  9a ). The activation energy of dehydriding reaction of as-milled α-AlH 

Conclusions
In this paper, a benign and cost-effective route was developed to synthesize α-AlH 3 (alane) at room temperature by employing liquid state reactive milling. The proposed mechanochemical method was proved to be green and convenient synthesis route for the α-AlH 3 composite. By selecting the appropriate reagents and optimizing the relative amount and milling parameters, the α-AlH 3 nanocomposite could be synthesized by reactive milling of commercial AlCl 3 and LiH in [2-Eim] OAc. Most importantly, the reaction pathway was controlled by step-wise addition of AlCl 3 into the reaction system and determined as the most critical parameter in the mechanochemical synthesis of α-AlH 3 /LiCl nano-composite. In the second stage, when 1/3 molar equivalent of AlCl 3 was added to the milling product (the product obtained from ball milling of LiH and AlCl 3 for 60 min), the reactional system undergoes an amorphization stage before the final product, with the desired product α-AlH 3 /LiCl being formed. The average crystallite size of α-AlH 3 , embedded with LiCl obtained by mechanochemical reaction in [2-Eim] OAc for 2 h, reached to 56 nm. In particular, the crude ionic liquid [2-Eim] OAc can be recycled for the secondary use. In comparison with the pure α-AlH 3 , the as-milled 3 nanocomposite exhibited an advantage in hydrogen desorption capacity, particularly in the de-hydriding kinetics, with desirable hydrogen desorption amount of 9.93 wt. % within 860 s at 160 °C. Thus, the proposed mechanochemical method offers a green and sustainable room-temperature approach for the large-scale production of α-AlH 3 nano-composite. The unsolvated alane can be successfully applied as a promising material for hydrogen storage material.       