Introduction
One of the main benefits of friction stir welding (FSW) is the possibility of joining of non-weldable alloys  [1] . With the FSW processes, various metallic and non-metallic materials can be similarly or dissimilarly joined  [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] . The quality of the final FSW product depends on many process parameters like rotational tool speed, tool traverse velocity, tool tilt angle, and tool plunge depth  [10, 11] . On the other hand, some other parameters can affect the final properties of the FSW joints  [12] [13] [14] . FSW tool pin profile is one of the essential factors that alter the internal flow of stir zone (SZ) and consequently changes welded samples' heat generation rate and mechanical properties. Various experimental studies have shown that the FSW pin shape and pin size have affected the thermal cycles, internal flow behaviors of material, and tool loads during the FSW process. These factors determine the final joint properties  [15] [16] [17] . Until now, leading research focused on investigating FSW tool pin shape effects on the final properties of the FSWed sample  [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] . The straight cylinder triangle, square and hexagonal shapes are the main FSW pin profiles investigated experimentally. On the other hand, limited research output is available that simulated effects of FSW pin profile on thermo-mechanical properties of final joint  [18] . The results indicated that the pin with more edges (like square or hexagonal pin) improves mechanical properties and internal material flow in joint line. On the other hand, it is shown that the size of the FSW tool pin also has a crucial impact on the thermo-mechanical behaviors in FSW joint line  [23] [24] [25] . During the FSW process, the bigger pin diameter increased axial force, traverse force, and maximum heat generation  [26, 27] . Instead, the larger tool pin diameter decreases the fatigue strength of the FSWed joint and decreases the mechanical properties of the dissimilar joint between aluminum and steel  [28] . Among various geometrical parameters of the FSW tool, the pin trapped angle plays an important role. The available information on this issue is minimal. Zhang et al. considered various pin thicknesses and stated that for better pin effects during the FSW process, the ratio of shoulder to pin should be 3. Their report shows that the pin angle is related to the shoulder diameter to be effective during the FSW joining process  [29] . Chen et al. employed a thermo-mechanical coupling model to investigate the effect of the FSW pin angle on the materials flow during FSW. They used 2024-T3 aluminum alloy as base metal and used three pins diameters. According to their results, at the higher pin angle, the heat generation and the materials flow are increased. They stated that the plastic flow near the tool increases at a higher pin diameter  [30] . Buffa et al. reported that at a higher pin angle, the generation heat increased and consequently bigger heat-affected zone (HAZ) and thermo-mechanical affected zone (TMAZ) are formed in joint lines  [31] . The tool pin angle plays a significant role in determining materials' thermal changes and flows during the FSW process. Until now, many issues about the effects of tool pin angle effects are not understood comprehensively. On the other hand, various types of materials can have different plastic flow behavior. Due to available literature effects of FSW pin angle on the heat generation and material flow during FSW of Al-Mg alloys have not been considered. In this issue, this article aims to study the effects of FSW tool pin angle on thermo-mechanical mechanism during FSW of AA5058 aluminum alloy. In this study, a validated computational fluid dynamic (CFD) model has been implemented to quantitatively analyze the effect of FSW pin angle on the heat generation and flow properties in FSW of AA5058 aluminum alloy.

Process Modeling


Model Description
A three-dimensional (3D) coupled material flow and heat model was utilized in steady-state conditions in the present study. The simulation procedure was done on the commercially ANSYS FLUENT software under the computational fluid dynamics (CFD) approach. The simulation domain dimension and geometry are defined according to the experimental tests, as shown in Figure  1a . A 3D Cartesian system for the welded material (WM) and the FSW tools was established. All geometries and process parameters were selected according to the experimental tests. The origin was set at the middle point of the FSW tool shoulder. The x-axis indicated the welding direction, and the z-axis indicated the FSW tool normal axis. The FSW tool had rotational movement, and the interior domain was set to move according to the welding tool speed. The interior domain had the same velocity as the welding tool by the velocity inlet side. The sidewalls, along with the top and bottom, had the same velocity as the velocity of the inlet. The outer plate of the workpiece was set at zero pressure to avoid the reverse flow at the pressure outlet. The WM is assumed to be a non-Newtonian single-phase fluid representing the quasi-static thermal and fluid flow boundary problem. In this case, it is necessary to solve Navier-Stokes equations  [32] [33] [34] [35] . In this regard's conservation equations for continuity, energy and momentum are used to solve the materials flow. Equations (  1 )-(3) indicated that the continuity, energy and momentum, respectively: ∂u i ∂x i = 0 (1) u indicated plastic velocity of material and i = 1, 2 and 3 presenting x, y and z direction. ∂u i u j ∂x i = - ∂P ∂x j + ∂ ∂x i µ ∂u j ∂x i + µ ∂u i ∂x i -ρu 1 ∂u j ∂x j (2) 1 i j j j i i j i i i j u u u u u P u x x x x x x μ μ ρ ∂ ∂ ∂   ∂ ∂ ∂ = - + + -   ∂ ∂ ∂ ∂ ∂ ∂   (2) In Equation (  2 ), the ρ, P and u1, presented density, pressure and welding velocity, respectively. ( ) ( ) 1 i p p i f i i i i u T T T C Cu K d d x x x x ρ ρ ∂   ∂ ∂ ∂ = - + + +   ∂ ∂ ∂ ∂   (3) In Equation (3), the Cp, K, di and dp, represents the specific heat, thermal conductivity, generated heat by friction and generated heat by plastic deformation, respectively. 

Material Model
In this model, AA5058 aluminum alloy is considered as the WM. The density and temperature-dependent thermo-mechanical properties are adapted for WM. As mentioned, the WM is assumed as Non-Newtonian viscosity, which correlates the deviatoric stress and the strain rate tensors. Non-Newtonian viscosity is assumed to change with the temperature and strain rate. For this reason, the viscosity of WM (µ) as a function of flow stress and strain rate can be defined  [36] [37] [38] : 3 f σ μ ε =  (4) The σf indicates flow stress of WM that can be presented as  [39] [40] [41] [42] : In Equation (  2 ), the ρ, P and u 1 , presented density, pressure and welding velocity, respectively. ρC p ∂(u i T) ∂x i = -ρC p u 1 ∂T ∂x i + ∂ ∂x i K ∂T ∂x i + d i + d f (3) In Equation (3), the C p , K, d i and d p , represents the specific heat, thermal conductivity, generated heat by friction and generated heat by plastic deformation, respectively.

Material Model
In this model, AA5058 aluminum alloy is considered as the WM. The density and temperature-dependent thermo-mechanical properties are adapted for WM. As mentioned, the WM is assumed as Non-Newtonian viscosity, which correlates the deviatoric stress and the strain rate tensors. Non-Newtonian viscosity is assumed to change with the temperature and strain rate. For this reason, the viscosity of WM (µ) as a function of flow stress and strain rate can be defined  [36] [37] [38] : µ = σ f 3 . ε (4) The σ f indicates flow stress of WM that can be presented as  [39] [40] [41] [42] : σ f = 1 α sinh -1 Z A 1 n = 1 α Z A 1 n + 1 + Z A 2 n (5) In Equation  (5) , Z is the Zener-Holloman parameter used for the calculation of the temperature-dependent strain rate  [20, 43] : Z = . ε Q RT (6) The A, n, and α are material constitutive constants. The raw materials undergo hot compression tests at various temperature and strain rates. The hot compression test procedure was followed by ASTM E9 standard number. After testing, the A, n, and α constants were reached by curve fitting. In this study, A, n, and α considered 1, 6.12 × 10 10 , and 5.63, respectively. Q and R are the activation energy and universal gas constant, respectively. The strain rate equation can be calculated by  [44, 45]   where u, v, and w are present the material velocities in the x, y, and z directions. With combination Equations of (  5 )-(  7 ) and put into (4), the viscosity of WM can be presented by  [43, 44, 46] : µ = 1 3εα Z(T, α) A 1 n + 1 + Z A 2 n (8)

Boundary Conditions
Where there is a difference in the thermal conductivity between the WM and the FSW tool, the heat transferred to the FSW tool from WM should be considered. The partition of the generated heat is transferred by the FSW tool at the interface of WM. For this reason, the conduction heat transfer model is set on the interface of the tool-workpiece. The heat losses at the walls (top, sides, and bottom surfaces of WM) include the convection and radiation heat transfer during the FSW  [47] [48] [49] . The sides walls and bottom surface of the workpiece are connected to the welding fixture and conduction heat transfer in those areas set. At the top surface of WM, radiation and convection heat transfer models were implemented. The meshed domain is depicted in Figure  1b .

Experimental Procedure
The 4 mm thickness AA5058 alloy aluminum alloy was selected as WM. The weld metal properties are evaluated in the laboratory in order to use in the simulation section. Mechanical and thermal properties of used WM are presented in Table  1 . The WM fixed in welding setup for the FSW process to remove any movement during the FSW process. The picture of the welding fixture and WM is depicted in Figure  2a . A modified milling machine (EF16, Tabriz, Iran) was used for the FSW process. After several trials and error testing plans, the optimum process parameters were selected during the experimental procedures. The tool rotational and traverse velocities were 850 rpm and 30 mm/min. The tool plunge depth and tilt angles were 0.2 mm and 2 • , respectively. For evaluation of simulation results, a thermal monitoring system is employed to record maximum heat generation during the FSW process. For this reason, two K-type thermocouples (Omega, Oakland, CA, USA) were placed on the WM's surface to record the temperature during the FSW procedure. One thermocouple is placed on the advancing side (AS) of WM and one on the retreating side (RS) of WM. The thermocouples were fixed at a 10.5 mm distance from the interface of base metals. The fixed thermocouple in AS is named T1, and the fixed thermocouple in RS is named T2. For further investigation, the obtained output from thermocouples reported as T1 and T2 results. To better understand the thermocouple's place, the location of thermocouples in WM is presented in Figure  2b . The FSW tools were made from H13 steel with three-pin angles. In this study, the pin tip radius was kept constant, and 0 • , 30 • , and 60 • were selected for pin angle-the schematic view of FSW tools size presented in Figure  2c . For better analysis of pin angle effects, the tool with 0 • , 30 • , and 60 • pin angle named Tool I, Tool II, and Tool III, respectively. procedure. One thermocouple is placed on the advancing side (AS) of WM and one on the retreating side (RS) of WM.  The thermocouples were fixed at a 10.5 mm distance from the interface of base metals. The fixed thermocouple in AS is named T1, and the fixed thermocouple in RS is named T2. For further investigation, the obtained output from thermocouples reported as T1 and T2 results. To better understand the thermocouple's place, the location of thermocouples in WM is presented in Figure  2b . The FSW tools were made from H13 steel with three-pin angles. In this study, the pin tip radius was kept constant, and 0°, 30°, and 60° were selected for pin angle-the schematic view of FSW tools size presented in Figure  2c . For better analysis of pin angle effects, the tool with 0°, 30°, and 60° pin angle named Tool I, Tool II, and Tool III, respectively.

Results and Discussions


Heat Generation Rate
The main factor during the study of heat generation during the FSW process is the contact area between tools and workpieces  [50] . For this reason, it is necessary to analyze the experimental results from recorded temperature by comparing the experimental results with simulation data. In this section, first, the data from experimental results are 

Results and Discussions


Heat Generation Rate
The main factor during the study of heat generation during the FSW process is the contact area between tools and workpieces  [50] . For this reason, it is necessary to analyze the experimental results from recorded temperature by comparing the experimental results with simulation data. In this section, first, the data from experimental results are analyzed. The experimental results of recorded temperature by thermocouples number 1 and 2 are presented in Figure  3 .  To find the relation with parts of the tool and generated heat in the simulation model, the area of each part (Shoulder, pin body, and pin tip) was calculated. These areas are in To find the relation with parts of the tool and generated heat in the simulation model, the area of each part (Shoulder, pin body, and pin tip) was calculated. These areas are in straight contact with WM, and the calculated area for a different part of the tools is presented in Table  2 . On the other hand, simulation results of generated heat from various parts of the tool were collected and reported in Table  2 . In this case, it is possible to find the relation between the total area of different tools and total generated heat. The obtained results show that increasing the FSW tool pin angle the total surface of tool decreased. The geometrical analysis shows that the total surface area of Tool I, II, and III 0.04084, 0.04059, and 0.04027, respectively. The numbers show with increasing tool pin angle, the total area decreased near 1.5% from Tool I to Tool III. These geometric results revealed that with increasing tool pin body, the generated heat by FSW tool shoulder increased, and on the other hand, the total heat generation by pin body decreased  [4] . The geometrical results show that the area of Tool III shoulder is 11% smaller than Tool I shoulder, and the generated heat by Tool III shoulder is 13% lower than Tool I shoulder in simulation. It is notable that with increasing pin angle, the area of the pin body in Tool III increased 26% more than the Tool I pin body. The simulation results revealed that the total amount of generated heat by pin body of Tool III was 19% more than generated heat by pin body of Tool I. All in all, keeping constant the tool pin tip diameter, the total amount of produced heat by this area was constant in all tools (61 • C). In a general point of view, the total amount of generated heat by increasing tool pin angle decrease. The simulation results show that the total amount of generated heat with tools I, II, and III was 446 • C, 434 • C, and 416 • C, respectively (Figure  4a ). The total difference amount of recorded heat and simulated heat were lower than 2%, which indicated good agreements between experimental results and simulation. To better understand the effects of different pins, the heat flow at the surface of different tools was assessed. For the unification of data comparison, a plane was selected with 3.8 mm height from pin tip. A schematic view from the selected plan is shown in Figure  4b . The simulation results of heat flow in the selected plan for the different tools are presented in Figure  4c . The statistical results were collected from different points in the selected plan-the data presented according to the degree. The circular numbers show the temperature changes around the pin. Due to obtained results, the maximum heat in all tool pins was produced in the front area of the advancing side (AS) and corner with the retreating side (RS). Due to simulation results, the heat generation and distribution around the tool pin were not uniform. During forward movements, the maximum heat of all samples was produced at a degree of 180 to the place in front of the tool. of different pins, the heat flow at the surface of different tools was assessed. For the unification of data comparison, a plane was selected with 3.8 mm height from pin tip. A schematic view from the selected plan is shown in Figure  4b . The simulation results of heat flow in the selected plan for the different tools are presented in Figure  4c . The statistical results were collected from different points in the selected plan-the data presented according to the degree. The circular numbers show the temperature changes around the pin. Due to obtained results, the maximum heat in all tool pins was produced in the front area of the advancing side (AS) and corner with the retreating side (RS). Due to simulation results, the heat generation and distribution around the tool pin were not uniform. During forward movements, the maximum heat of all samples was produced at a degree of 180 to the place in front of the tool.

Heat Distribution
For a better understanding of the FSW tool pin angle on internal heat flow, the simulation results of the internal heat distribution of various pin angles are depicted in Figure  5a . The simulation results revealed that the heat concentration in AS is higher than RS. Simulation results revealed this heat flow behavior was detected in joints that FSWed with 

Heat Distribution
For a better understanding of the FSW tool pin angle on internal heat flow, the simulation results of the internal heat distribution of various pin angles are depicted in Figure  5a . The simulation results revealed that the heat concentration in AS is higher than RS. Simulation results revealed this heat flow behavior was detected in joints that FSWed with Tool I, Tool II and Tool III. This phenomenon is seen at surface heat flow for FSWed samples with Tool I, II, and III. The generated heat can diffuse equally on the metal surface, but the rotation movement of the FSW tool changes the heat flow with rotation of plasticized metals  [3, 5] . During rotational movements of FSW tool the plasticized aluminum alloy transferred from AS to RS of joint line  [51] [52] [53] . In this case, the hot plasticized aluminum alloy pressed and concentrates in RS and heat flow equality changes (Figure  5b ). This phenomenon is happened in all cases. The heat distribution in tool III is more uniform comparing others. The materials flow velocity at the selected plan described in Figure  4b  for Tool I, Tool II and Tool III is depicted in Figure  5c . Due to obtained results from simulation, the maximum velocity of materials in Tool I, Tool II, and Tool III are 15.2 mm/s, 13.1 mm/s, and 11.1 mm/s, respectively. Unlike simulation results that maximum heat was generated in front of the tool; the maximum flow velocity is predicted in the middle of RS. It seems, therefore, from the stretching of plasticized materials in the AS and the compression of materials in the RS, that the velocity of materials does not have a linear relation with generated heat  [54] [55] [56] [57] . for Tool I, Tool II and Tool III is depicted in Figure  5c . Due to obtained results from simulation, the maximum velocity of materials in Tool I, Tool II, and Tool III are 15.2 mm/s, 13.1 mm/s, and 11.1 mm/s, respectively. Unlike simulation results that maximum heat was generated in front of the tool; the maximum flow velocity is predicted in the middle of RS. It seems, therefore, from the stretching of plasticized materials in the AS and the compression of materials in the RS, that the velocity of materials does not have a linear relation with generated heat  [54] [55] [56] [57] . 

Flow of Materials
The materials flow in the FSW joining process is the consequence of materials velocity and heat generation during the stirring action of the FSW tool  [58] [59] [60] [61] . Due to a better understanding of thermo-mechanical outputs and relation with materials velocity results with the actual situation, it is necessary to investigate the surface flow of FSW joints. The surface flow of FSWed samples welded with Tool I, II, and III are presented in Figure  6a . 

Flow of Materials
The materials flow in the FSW joining process is the consequence of materials velocity and heat generation during the stirring action of the FSW tool  [58] [59] [60] [61] . Due to a better understanding of thermo-mechanical outputs and relation with materials velocity results with the actual situation, it is necessary to investigate the surface flow of FSW joints. The surface flow of FSWed samples welded with Tool I, II, and III are presented in Figure  6a . The results show that all welds formed in appropriate form without any macro-scale defects. The comparative investigation of surface flow revealed that the flow rings in all samples are uniform and periodic, and these flow rings are results of angular and traverse velocities of the FSW tool  [62] [63] [64] . The high magnification image from surface flow revealed that the distance between flow rings in the joint FSWed by Tool I, II, and III are 0.3 mm, 0.26 mm, and 0.22 mm, respectively. Due to obtained results, the distance between flow rings decreases by increasing tool pin angle. The longitudinal section from the results of the flow path of materials is depicted in Figure  6b . The obtained results show that the softened area around the Tool increases with increasing tool pin angle. These phenomena show that the higher the mechanical works by tool, the more the pin angle increased the plasticized area and consequently, the shaping of the raw materials by the FSW tool increased  [7, 8] . The obtained results revealed that the deformed area front of Tool III is much bigger than Tool I case. On the other hand, the stirring action of plasticized metals in the backside of Tool III is bigger than Tool I. These effects revealed that the mechanical works applied in the joint line increased with increasing FSW tool pin angle. creasing tool pin angle. These phenomena show that the higher the mechanical works by tool, the more the pin angle increased the plasticized area and consequently, the shaping of the raw materials by the FSW tool increased  [7, 8] . The obtained results revealed that the deformed area front of Tool III is much bigger than Tool I case. On the other hand, the stirring action of plasticized metals in the backside of Tool III is bigger than Tool I. These effects revealed that the mechanical works applied in the joint line increased with increasing FSW tool pin angle. The cross-section view of simulation results from internal flow path in joint with various tool pins (Tool I, II and III) is depicted in Figure  7a . Due to obtained results, the stirring of WM increased at a higher pin angle. This result was detectable in longitudinal section as well. The cross-section view of simulation results from internal flow path in joint with various tool pins (Tool I, II and III) is depicted in Figure  7a . Due to obtained results, the stirring of WM increased at a higher pin angle. This result was detectable in longitudinal section as well. The stir zone area in the joint that FSWed with Tool III was 35% bigger than in the joint that FSWed with the tool I. On the other hand, the obtained results revealed that, the materials flow is concentrated in RS, and the stirring action is higher in RS in all FSWed samples. This phenomenon shows why materials velocity in RS was higher than AS. The rotational FSW tool stretched plasticized materials from AS to RS  [54, [65] [66] [67] . The simulation results of flow path show that the concentration of materials in RS increased at higher pin angle, and the shape of stir zone tended to form asymmetry. Due to obtained results from simulation, the mechanical work by pin in SZ increased with increasing pin angle. For this reason, the higher angle increases the stirring action in SZ. The materials viscosity changes around the selected plan are depicted in Figure  7b . Due to obtained results, the generated heat and materials flow velocity caused the viscosity of materials in points with higher temperatures (RS front and AS front) to decrease at the lowest amounts. tion results of flow path show that the concentration of materials in RS increased at higher pin angle, and the shape of stir zone tended to form asymmetry. Due to obtained results from simulation, the mechanical work by pin in SZ increased with increasing pin angle. For this reason, the higher angle increases the stirring action in SZ. The materials viscosity changes around the selected plan are depicted in Figure  7b . Due to obtained results, the generated heat and materials flow velocity caused the viscosity of materials in points with higher temperatures (RS front and AS front) to decrease at the lowest amounts. 

Conclusions
In this research, the heat generation and internal materials flow during the FSW process of AA5058 aluminum alloy with various tool pin angles were simulated. The thermal results were simulated and validated by experimental results. The obtained results can be summarized as follows: 1. The heat generation at a lower pin angle is more than a higher pin angle. With a higher pin angle, the total surface of the tool shoulder and pin that are in contact with the workpiece decrease. For this reason, the frictional heat generation decreases. Due to obtained results, the maximum heat was generated with Tool I (446 °C) and the minimum heat produced by Tool III (416 °C). This difference was created due to the decreasing contact surface of Tool III (0.04027 m 2 ) compared to Tool I (0.04084 m 2 ) with the workpiece. 2. The internal head distributes uniformly at a higher Tool pin angle. Due to the rotational direction of the tool, the materials stretched from AS to RS, and the concentration of plasticized material and heat in the RS was more than in the AS. This heat flow behavior is detected in internal and surface heat distribution. 3. The simulation results of internal materials flow revealed that with increasing the pin angle, the stirring action of the tool increase. The higher stirring action improves the 

Conclusions
In this research, the heat generation and internal materials flow during the FSW process of AA5058 aluminum alloy with various tool pin angles were simulated. The thermal results were simulated and validated by experimental results. The obtained results can be summarized as follows: 1. The heat generation at a lower pin angle is more than a higher pin angle. With a higher pin angle, the total surface of the tool shoulder and pin that are in contact with the workpiece decrease. For this reason, the frictional heat generation decreases. Due to obtained results, the maximum heat was generated with Tool I (446 • C) and the minimum heat produced by Tool III (416 • C). This difference was created due to the decreasing contact surface of Tool III (0.04027 m 2 ) compared to Tool I (0.04084 m 2 ) with the workpiece. 2. The internal head distributes uniformly at a higher Tool pin angle. Due to the rotational direction of the tool, the materials stretched from AS to RS, and the concentration of plasticized material and heat in the RS was more than in the AS. This heat flow behavior is detected in internal and surface heat distribution.

3.
The simulation results of internal materials flow revealed that with increasing the pin angle, the stirring action of the tool increase. The higher stirring action improves the internal flow of materials. Bigger SZ with uniform flow pattern formed in stir zone of joint that FSWed with Tool III. Moreover, with the benefit of higher mechanical works and lower heat generation, the higher pin angle plays a positive role during the FSW process. Funding: Not applicable.