antibody to Sioo protein was performed using a standard peroxidase antiperoxidase technique. The sections were trypsinized before application of primary antibody (D.A.K.O. Rabbit anticow SIOO Code Z311 lot 026) at a final dilution of 1:100. Control sections of normal skin adjacent to non-neoplastic/non-infiammatory lesions, and of normal skin removed at autopsy (20 cases) were used. The numbers of basal cells overlying the intradermal lesion were counted (500-1000 cells), and the number of epidermal dendritic Sioo positive cells lying above them were counted. Using this method, S100 positive, basal melanocytes were excluded. Counts were expressed as the number of epidermal dendritic Sioo positive cells per 200 basal cells.
Student's unpaired r-test was used to assess statistical differences between necrobiosis lipoidica, granuloma annulare, and the control group.

RESULTS
All the biopsies were of predominantly lesional skin. There was no disparity between the histological and clinical diagnoses in any of the cases. All showed the recognized features of collagen degeneration, some having palisaded granulomas. In the majority, the full thickness of the biopsy that included the tower reticular dermis was involved by the lesions. Dendritic cells were seen positively stained, lying between keratinocytes, within the epidermis (Fig.  i ). There was an increase in numbers of epidermal dendritic Sioo positive cells in both granuloma annulare (mean 80) and necrobiosis lipoidica (mean 24 5), compared with normal skin controls (mean 37) (see Table  i} . The numbers were higher in necrobiosis lipoidica than granuloma annulare (o 001 > P > 0 0005); but there was no statistical difference between granuloma annulare and the control group (015 > P>oio).  Of the seven patients with necrobiosis lipoidica one had diabetes mellitus and the number of SIOO positive dendritic cells within this patient's biopsy was in the same range as the remaining six. None of the eight patients with granuloma annulare were known to be diabetic.

DISCUSSION
Although clinically different, the similarity of the histological features of granuloma annulare and necrobiosis lipoidica raises the possibility of a common pathogenesis. We have determined the dendritic S100 protein positive subset of the Langerhans cell population in the epidermis in these two conditions. There was a significantly higher number of Sioo positive dendritic cells within the epidermis, above the basal layer, in necrobiosis lipoidica compared with both normal skin and granuloma annulare. In the latter the numbers of cells were elevated, but not to a significant level above normal. This suggests that the pathogenesis of the two conditions may be different. We have found that the numbers of Sioo positive epidermal dendritic cells are elevated to a similar level to that seen in necrobiosis lipoidica in sarcoidosis, positive Kveim test biopsies, tuberculous leprosy and other tuberculous reactions (unpublished data). A cellmediated, type IV delayed-hypersensitivity reaction is thought to be common to all these conditions. The increased numbers of Sioo and dendritic cells within the epidermis in necrobiosis lipoidica may be a reflection of a similar pathological process. The widely accepted view is that necrobiosis lipoidica is a result of collagen degeneration with a subsequent histiocytic inflammatory reaction.^ However, the initiating stimulus to degeneration remains unknown. An immune complex vasculitis has also been proposed; direct immunofiuorescence demonstration of IgM and C3 in vessel walls, and fibrinogen within necrobiotic areas, lends some support to this theory;*'-^ however, other workers have found these to be present only rarely." There is also little histological evidence of a vasculitis, the vessels showing only a mild degree of intimal thickening. The association of necrobiosis lipoidica with diabetes mellitus has led to the suggestion that the changes may be a result of diabetic microangiopathy.^ Vascular changes, however, are often absent, and the affected vessels are usually larger than those involved in diabetic microangiopathy. Only one of our cases had diabetes mellitus. In granuloma annulare the primary event is also thought to be collagen degeneration. Electron microscopy shows degeneration of elastic and collagen fibres in necrobiotic areas.'*^''' Vascular changes are few."* A cell-mediated immune reaction has been implicated with the demonstration of increased numbers of T helper/inducer lymphocytes within the granulomatous infiltrate, an increased number of 0KT6 positive Langerhans cells within epidermis and dermis, and increased HLA-DR antigen and interleukin 2 receptor expression.' ^ The increased numbers of S100 positive cells in granuloma annulare lends some support to these findings, but the numbers are higher in necrobiosis Hpoidica and other known type IV delayed hypersensitivity reactions."^ In conclusion, an increase in the number of epidermal dendritic Sioo positive cells above the basal layer, as well as implicating a cell mediated immune-reaction, may provide an adjunct to histological means of distinguishing between necrobiosis lipoidica and granuloma annulare.