394
Maria  by  Tan et al. (1980)  and in 34% (10 of 29) by  Cattogio et al. (1983) . In CREST (acrosclerosis) Scl 70 antibodies were reported in 13",, of patients: 3 of 24 patients reported by  Tan et al. (1980)  and 6 of 46 patients reported by  Cattogio et al. (1983) . The aim of the present study was to evaluate the specificity of Scl 70 antibody for systemic sclerosis compared with that of ACA, and to measure the frequency of occurrence of Scl 70 in acrosclerosis and diffuse scleroderma, and its association with ANA and ACA.

METHODS


Patients
The studies were performed in 107 patients with systemic sclerosis: 68 with acrosclerosis and 39 with diffuse scleroderma (Table  i ). Controls comprised 90 patients with other connective tissue diseases, 10 with mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD), 37 with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 22 with other collagen diseases and 18 with chronic glomerulonephritis (Table  2 ). The criteria for diagnosis of acrosclerosis were: a protracted and relatively benign course, limited skin changes (usually confined to the hands, forearms and face, with telangiectases and, frequently, calcium deposits), and pronounced Raynaud's phenomenon preceding indurations and visceral involvement by several years  (Jablonska, 1975; Rodnan, Jablonska & Mcdsger, 1979) . Diffuse scleroderma was classified according to the preliminary ARA criteria of  Masi et al. (1980)  and according to  Jablonska (1975) .  Patients were classified as having diffuse scleroderma if indurations of the skin involved the face, extremities and the trunk ('central cutaneous involvement'), often with symmetrical hyper-and hypopigmentation. The course was usually more rapid and severe, with a short period between the onset of Raynaud's phenomenon and the onset of indurations  (Jablonska, 1975; Masi et al., 1980) . Patients were considered to have lung involvement if they had any one of the following findings: Bibasilar pulmonary interstitial fibrosis on chest X-ray; vital capacity, forced expiratory volume for first second, mid-expiratory fiow, or thoracic gas volume less than 75'^'o of predicted normal. Patients were considered to have heart involvement if they had any one of the following findings on electrocardiography, ECHO-cardiography and/or X-ray: cardiac arrhythmias, conduction disturbances, right heart failure secondary to pulmonary hypertension, or pericarditis. Patients were considered to have kidney involvement if they had abnormal clearance and/or changes in urinalysis, and were considered to have muscle involvement if they had any one of the following findings: primary muscle involvement on electromyography, increased levels of muscle enzymes: creatine-phosphokinase, aldolase and transaminases, or morphological changes in muscle biopsy. MCTD was diagnosed according to the clinical and serological criteria of  Sharp et al. (1979)  and SLE according to the revised ARA criteria  (Tan et al, 1982) .

Antibody testing
Scl 70 antigen was prepared from calf thymus according to the method of  Tan et al. (1980) , with certain modifications by  Kumar et al. (1984) . The antigen is very unstable, and antigenicity is lost if it is stored for prolonged periods at 4 C. 50 g calf thymus freshly obtained from the slaughter house was cut into small cubes and homogenized in a Waring blender with 100 ml of phosphate buffered saline containing i mM of mercaptoethanol and o-1 mM of phenylmethylsulphonyl fiuoride. The homogenate was stirred for 2 h at 4 C and then centrifuged at 140005^ for I h. The supernatant, which contained primarily RNP and Sm activity, was discarded. The pellet was suspended in phosphate buffered saline containing 05 M NaCl and mixed for i h. The supernatant obtained upon centrifugation of this homogenate (at 68 000 g for 2 h) contained Scl 70 activity and was extensively dialysed against distilled water and freeze dried. The freeze dried preparation was dissolved in 10 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 75 to give a final protein concentration of 200 mg/ml. Immunodiffusion was performed according to the method of  Tan et al. (1980) , as standardized for the detection of antibodies to RNP and Sm by  Kumar et al. (1984) -All sera were also tested on HEp-2 cells for ACA and other ANA, using the method described previously  (Beutner et al., 1985) . The conjugate used was fiuorescein labelled goat anti-human IgG (Heintel, Vienna, Austria), with a fiuorescein to protein ratio of 2-2, 16 units/ml. This was diluted t: 128 to contain 5 units/ml.

RESULTS
Scl 70 antibody appeared significantly more frequently in diffuse scleroderma (77",, of patients) than in acrosclerosis (44",,) {P < 005; Table  i ). The controls were negative, with the exception of two patients with MCTD (Table  2 ), both falling within the spectrum of systemic sclerosis (pronounced Raynaud's phenomenon with indurative oedema of the hands, mask-like facies Maria Jarzabek-Chorzelska et al with thinning ofthe lips and, in one, diminished oesophageal motility). Thus, Scl 70 appears to be highly specific of systemic sclerosis. Patients with acrosclerosis positive for ACA were invariably negative for Scl 70 (Table  3 ). Conversely, patients with acrosclerosis negative for ACA were found to be positive for Scl 70 in 63"(, cases, whereas in acrosclerosis patients as a whole Scl 70 antibody was present in 44",, ofthe cases (Table  1 ). It should be emphasized that among 39 cases of diffuse scleroderma, 16 observed by us for more than 10 years were classified initially as severe acrosclerosis or transitional form, acrosclerosis-diffuse scleroderma. The frequency of Scl 70 antibody in this group was 12 of 16 C75"o), ie. essentially the same as in typical cases of diffuse scleroderma. Therefore, the transitional form was grouped with diffuse scleroderma. Immunofiuorescence studies on HEp-2 showed a characteristic pattern with all sera positive in the immunodiffusion test for Scl 70 antibody. The fiuorescence pattern was almost homogeneous due to diffuse fine, densely packed speckles associated, in most cases, with weak nucleolar staining (Fig.  i ). If patients are classified according to the varieties of systemic sclerosis and presence or absence of Scl 70 antibody, slight differences can be seen (Tables  4  and 5 ). There were no -In this group only cases negative for ACA are included; cases positive for ACA have been described in detail previously  (Chorzelski et al, 1985) . ^ Some indurations and/or atrophy, mainly on the thorax. Significantly different from SCL 70 positive patients (fraction test) *P < 005, **P < 0 01. differences in major clinical characteristics, i.e. age, sex, and time between appearance of Raynaud's phenomenon and skin indurations, between the SCL 70 positive and negative groups. As can be seen in Table  4 , skin indurations confined to the digits, and calcinosis were more frequent in acrosclerosis cases negative for Scl 70, whereas immobilization and contractures of the fingers were more frequent in patients positive for Scl 70. However, if only cases negative for ACA are evaluated, these differences were not statistically significant. Visceral involvement was comparable in the two groups, with the exception of somewhat more frequent heart changes in Scl 70 negative cases. It should be stressed that central cutaneous involvement was invariably absent in patients negative for Scl 70, whereas slight changes on the thorax were noticed in 20% of cases positive for Scl 70. Significantly different from Scl 70 positive group *P < o 05, **/' < 001 compared using a fraction test. As can be seen in Table  5 , digital scars and acrolysis, telangiectases and lixng involvement were more frequent in cases of diffuse scleroderma positive for Scl 70. Antinuclear antibodies, as detected on HEp-2 cells and monkey oesophagus, were found in a higher percentage of cases of acrosclerosis and diffuse scleroderma positive for Scl 70 (Tables  4  and 5 ). RNP antibodies were found in five cases negative for Scl 70, four cases of acrosclerosis and one of diffuse scleroderma. Nucleolar staining without any associated patterns was found in five cases, four of acrosclerosis and one of diffuse scleroderma, all negative for Scl 70.

DISCUSSION
Scl 70 antibody was found to be a specific serological marker of systemic scleroderma. In our series it was detected at a much higher frequency than reported in previous publications  (Tan et al., 1980; Catoggio et al., 1983) , but comparable results have been reported recently by  Takehara, Moroi and Ishibashi (t985) . The higher detection rates of Scl 70 in our study,  77",, in 13652133, 1986, 4 , Downloaded from  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j .  1365-2133.1986.tb06233. x by Hochschule Mannheim, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions ( https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions ) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License diffuse scleroderma and 44' *<, in acrosclerosis, may be related to differences in the type of cases studied and, at least in part, to the technique of antigen preparation  (Ktmiar et al., unpublished observations) . On HEp-2, sera positive for Scl 70 showed a very characteristic, fijie speckled, almost homogeneous immunofiuorescence pattern, which could be recognized easily. This pattern corresponds to the fine speckles described by  Tan et al. (1980) . If the titre of ANA with this pattern on HEp-2 was higher than i; 80, it was invariably associated with a positive immunodiffusion test for Scl 70. Since immunodiffusion is less sensitive than immunofluorescence, it is to be expected that Scl 70 antibody, demonstrated in lower titres in the indirect IF test, would not be detectable by immunodiffusion. Thus, it is conceivable that Scl 70 antibody occurs even more frequently than detected in our study. In contrast to ACA antibody, which is a marker of an abortive subset of acrosclerosis with almost no cutaneous indurations  (Chorzelski et al., 1985) , Scl 70 is a marker of systemic sclerosis as a whole, with prevalence in diffuse scleroderma, but present also in a high proportion of cases of acrosclerosis. Thus, it does not discriminate between the subsets of systemic scleroderma. There were only slight clinical differences between cases positive and negative for Scl 70. In patients with acrosclerosis negative for Scl 70, the indurations were confined more frequently to the fingers and there were fewer contractures of the fingers; calcinosis was found in a somewhat larger proportion of the patients, and there was no induration or atrophy on the trunk; the disease was thus less severe than in patients positive for Scl 70 antibody. In patients with diffuse scleroderma the clinical differences between patients positive and those negative for Scl 70 were less conspicuous. Antinuclear antibodies were found at titres above i :8o on HEp-2 in all patients positive for Scl 70. They were significantly less frequent in both acrosclerosis and diffuse scleroderma patients negative for Scl 70. On monkey oesophagus, ANA at titres above i: 80 were not found in all Scl 70 positive cases, but they also occurred significantly more frequetitly in acrosclerosis and diffuse scleroderma cases positive for Scl 70 (Table  5 ). ACA positive cases of acroscterosis were, in our study, invariably negative for Scl 70 antibody. Only two exceptional cases positive for Scl 70 and ACA antibodies have been reported by  Ruffatti et al. (1985) , and the authors stress that this is a rare finding. Scl 70 was not detected in other collagen diseases, with the exception of two overlap cases, both with some cutaneous symptoms of sclerodertna (MCTD within the spectrum of scleroderma). As shown in Figure  2 , the gap between the frequency of ACA and of Scl 70 will probably be narrowed in future studies either by increasing the sensitivity of the methods or by detection of other, as yet unidentified antibodies. In our series, this gap is filled, in a part, by the RNP and anti-nucleolar antibodies. The value of tests for Scl 70 antibody and ACA may well prove to lie also in their prognostic role, in predicting whether patients with acrosclerosis will, in time, develop into true diffuse scleroderma or remain as cases of acrosclerosis with minimal cutaneous involvement. This is supported by more than 10 years of retrospective study on 16 cases of diffuse scleroderma, diagnosed originally as acrosclerosis, and later as transitional form; 12 of these 16 (75",,) were positive for Scl 70 antibody. Follow-up studies are needed to determine whether cases of acrosclerosis that are positive for Scl 70 antibodies are at greater risk of developing frank diffuse scleroderma.