Localisation des orifices des art~res r6nales dans l'aorte
REsumE : 30 aortes abdominales des cadavres d'adultes ont 6t6 dissrqures. La localisation de l'orifice de l'a. mrsentErique supErieure et sa situation par rapport ~ celui du tronc coeliaque a EtE identifiEe sur la paroi aortique. La localisation des orifices des artrres rEnales par rapport g ceux de ces deux attires a EtE dEterminEe. L'orifice de l'a. mEsentErique supErieure est gEnEralement locali-s6 distalement et ~t droite de celui du tronc coeliaque. La distance moyenne entre les deux orifices Etait 17,9 mm. L'orifice de l'a. rEnale droite se trouvait en position plus crfiniale que celui de l'a. rdnale gauche (53,3 %). Cependant, les orifices de deux artrres droite et gauche se trouvaient au mame niveau dans trois cas (10 %). Les orifices des aa. rEnales Etaient localisEs gEnrralement dans les faces latErale et antEro-latErale de l'aorte. Le but de cette Etude est d'apporter une contribution ~ l'angiographie selective et aux interventions chirurgicales destinEes au prEl~vement et ~ la transplantation du rein. Nos rEsultats ont EtE compares ~t ceux d'autres Etudes rEa-lisEes chez l'homme.

Key words: Renal artery --Angiography --Abdominal aorta --Morphometric analysis
Renal and intrarenal vascular anatomy has been investigated in many previous studies  [1, 4, 6, 9, 11-13, 15, 16] . However, studies on location of the ostia of the renal aa. on the aortic wall are scant in the literature  [3, 10] . Renal angiography is frequently used in the context of diagnosis and treatments. Therefore, the morphologic features of the ostia of the renal aa. on the aortic wall should be familiar to radiologists, especially those dealing with selective renal angiography.

Materials and methods
Adult abdominal aorta specimens, a total of 30 in number, were obtained from cadavers in the Departments of Anatomy at the Medical Faculties of Gtilhane Military Medical Academy, Hacettepe University and 19 Mayis University. The abdominal aorta of each cadaver was sectioned above the celiac trunk cranially and above the aortic bifurcation caudally, and resected from its branches. The lumen of each specimen was washed under tap water. The anterior wall of the aorta was fixed on a flat surface and the posterior wall was cut midsagittally. The cut margins were reflected laterally and also fixed on the flat surface. The ostia of aa. located on the aortic wall were visualised (Fig.  1 ). Photographs of each specimen were taken together with a 5 cm ruler, and the following distances were measured: Ostia of the aa. localized on the internal wall of the aorta, ct: celiac trunk, sin: superior mesenteric a., lr: left renal a., rr: right renal a., aa: abdominal aorta 1. the distance between the midpoint of the distal border of the celiac ostium and the midpoint of the distal border of the superior mesenteric ostium (VcM) (Fig.  2 ), 2. the distances from the midpoint of the celiac trunk to the midpoints of the distal borders of the right (VcR R) and left (VcL R) renal ostia (Fig.  2 ), 3. the distances from the midpoint of the distal border of the superior mesenteric ostium to the midpoints of the distal border of the right (VMR R) and left (VMLR) renal ostia (Fig.  2 ). A horizontal line was drawn at the level of the renal aa. Then, the abdominal aorta was divided into ten equal vertical regions by lines crossing this horizontal line vertically. The locations of the ostia of the renal aa. on the aortic wall, and their cranial or caudal position in relation to the ostium of the superior mesenteric a. were identified (Fig.  2 ). A parametric two-sample analysis test was carried out to evaluate the differences between the distances of the right and left renal ostia from the superior mesenteric and celiac ostia.

Results
The ostium of the superior mesenteric a. was located in the inferior and right lateral region of the ostium of the celiac t r u n k in 22 out of 30 of the cases (73.3%). The mean distance between the two ostia was: VCM o = 18 mm The mean distances between the ostia of the renal aa. and the ostia of the superior mesenteric a. and the celiac trunk were collected in Table  1 . As shown in Table  1 , the ostium of the right r e n a l a. was c l o s e r to the ostium of the superior mesenteric a. than the left. Thus, the ostium of the right renal a. had a cranial location in 53.3% of cases. However, the ostium of the left renal a. was located cranially in 36.6% of the cases. In the remaining 10%, both renal aa. were at the same level. In order to evaluate the distances of the right and left renal ostia from the superior mesenteric and celiac ostia, a p a r a m e t r i c t w o -s a m p l e analysis test was done. There was no statistically significant difference between Vel r and Vcr r (p > 0,05), however the difference between Vmlr and Vmr r was found to be significant (p < 0,05). The range of distribution of the locations of the renal aa. on the internal aortic wall is shown in Figure  3 . Twentynine ostia (48.3%) were located in the lateral, 19 (31.6%) in the anterolateral and 10 in the anterolateral-lateral border zone, one in the posterolateral and one in the posterolateral-posterior border zone. According to our findings, the locations of the arteries on the aortic wall were as shown in Figure  2 .

Discussion
Different studies dealing with the sites of origin of the renal aa. from the abdominal aorta were reviewed in the literature. However, the results of these studies depended only upon external observations and not on identification of the ostia of the renal aa. from within the aorta. A wide range of findings such as anterolateral, lateral and anterior locations were reported in this study  [9] .  

mm mesenteric
The distance between the celiac and the superior mesenteric ostia (VCMo) was found as 18 mm Publications in the angiographic literature consider the usual position of the renal ostia to be lateral  [8]  or dorsal  [10]  on the aortic wall. There are two similar studies dealing with the locations of the renal ostia on the internal wall of the ~-~ 0 0 Fig.  3  The range of distribution of the k-Pk Pk PL-P P zone zone locations of renal Regions aa. on the aortic wall abdominal aorta  [3, 10] . We defined certain such locations by using more significant anatomic landmarks. Moreover, we did not take into account the ostia of multiple renal aa. in order not to affect the data. As stated by many authors, the incidence of multiple renal aa. range from 13 to 60% and the mean value is reported as 30%  [9, 14] . We also observed in our series that one specimen had bilateral and four specimens had unilateral multiple renal aa. (16%). Bauer and Robbins reported that the ostia of the renal aa. were localized on the lateral and anterolateral walls of the aorta in 79 and 15.4% of cases, respectively  [3] . However, Odman and Ranniger found the incidence of a lateral location of the renal aa. to be 55.7%  [10] . Our findings were more compatible with the findings of Odman and Ranniger, since the incidence of lateral and anterolateral locations were 48.3% and 31.6%, respectively. According to Odman and Ranniger, the ostium of the right renal a. was located more on the anterior wall and that of the left renal a. on the lateral wall of the abdominal aorta. These authors also reported that renal aa. originating from the anterior wall had a more cranial position near the ostium of the superior mesenteric a. [ 10]. We found that renal ostia on the lateral wall of the abdominal aorta had a cranial, but ostia on the anterolateral wall a caudal position. This result accounted for the more cranial position of the right renal ostium in relation to the left renal ostium. Extreme (anterior or posterior wall) locations of renal ostia on the aortic wall have been reported to be related to developmental variations of the mesonephric aa.  [2, 5, 7] . Although the distance between the ostia of the superior mesenteric a. and the celiac trunk differed in many cases, locations of the renal ostia did not exhibit significant differences. We believe that, for the success of catheterization in selective angiographic procedures, the following anatomical guidelines should be kept in mind: • The ostium of the right renal a. is usually located on the lateral wall of the abdominal aorta and has a more cranial position than the left. It is nearer to the superior mesenteric ostium and approximately 14 mm distal to it. • The location of the ostium of the left renal a. is similar to that of the fight; however its distance from the superior mesenteric ostium is approximately 17.5 mm distal to it. • The ostium of the superior mesenteric a. is usually located on the right and approximately 18 mm distal to the ostium of the celiac trunk.