Introduction
Eugen Stumpfl, whose work this special volume honors, was one of the first to recognize the evidence for and potential importance of fluids in platinum-group element (PGE) ore petrogenesis in layered intrusions (e.g.,  Stumpfl and Tarkian 1976; Stumpfl and Rucklidge 1982) . Recent work continues to expand on the role of fluids and fluid overpressure in mafic magma chambers in general (e.g.,  Tait and Jaupert 1992)  and in layered intrusions in particular (e.g.,  Stumpfl and Rucklidge 1982; Ballhaus and Stumpfl 1985; Boudreau 1992) . The presence of either fluid phases or volatile-rich silicate liquids in layered intrusions is evidenced by hydrous minerals, graphite and pegmatoidal textures. Mobilization of such fluids has been implicated in the formation of ultramafic pegmatites in the Bushveld and other layered complexes (e.g.,  Viljoen and Scoon 1985; McBirney and Sonnenthal 1990; McBirney and Naslund 1990; Mogessie et al. 1991; Scoon and Mitchell 1994) . In the Bushveld Complex, such pegmatoidal horizons are the subject of great interest as they are often host to economic PGE deposits.  Scoon and Mitchell (1994)  proposed that transgressive ultramafic bodies form from the immiscible separation of an iron-rich liquid from its felsic counterpart, such that the denser, iron-rich liquid drains downwards to form transgressive pegmatitic bodies. It has alternatively been suggested that these ultramafic pegmatitic rocks are channel ways for upward fluid migration through the crystal pile whereby hydration from foot-wall cumulates leads to isothermal melting and the formation of a melt-rich horizon  (Nicholson and Mathez 1991) . Additional evidence for fluid mobilization in layered intrusions is found in mineral chemistry and rock structures. High-Cl apatites found in the rocks beneath the Merensky reef have been interpreted as indicating Cl enrichment from upwardly migrating fluids  (Boudreau et al. 1986; Boudreau and Kruger 1990; cf. Boudreau and McCallum 1989) , and pothole structures in the Bushveld Complex have been modeled as resulting from fluid overpressure  (Boudreau 1992) . Such potholes are often associated with discordant pegmatitic bodies comprised of hydrous minerals and which are interpreted to have been fluid escape channels  (Ballhaus and Stumpfl 1985; Buntin et al. 1985) . The limited published data available indicate that rocks from pothole structures are enriched in elements which are mobile in aqueous fluids, relative to immobile incompatible elements (e.g.,  Ballhaus 1988) . The degassing of such fluids from an interstitial melt in a crystallizing pile can lead to overpressure development  (Boudreau 1992) .  Ferguson and McCarthy (1970)  were the first to describe this breccia pipe which is wholly within the Bushveld Complex, and also suggested it formed in response to fluid overpressure. We expand on the study of  Ferguson and  McCarthy and examine the physical characteristics of the breccia pipe and its relation to the surrounding country rock, based on whole-rock and major-and trace-element analyses of the blocks within the pipe and country rocks as well as microprobe analyses of the constituent minerals. The data and field evidence show that the blocks in the pipe are not in situ but were transported from below. Furthermore, we establish that fluid overpressure generated by crystallization of fluid-saturated interstitial silicate liquid can give rise to the overpressures required for the explosive emplacement of the breccia pipe.

Geology of the Bushveld Complex
The Bushveld Complex is a layered mafic intrusion with an aerial extent of approximately 66,000 km 2 situated in the Kaapvaal province of the Republic of South Africa (Fig.  1 ). The Bushveld Complex is a member of the Bushveld magmatic province which comprises three different magmatic events, starting with the eruption of the Rooiberg felsites approximately 2.06 Ga ago  (Walraven 1988) . The Rooiberg felsites form the roof to the economically important, layered mafic rocks which comprise the Bushveld Complex proper, which was intruded beneath the felsites during multiple magmatic pulses. Three to four distinct magmatic pulses have been proposed, based on Sr isotope distinctions at the Critical Zone/Main Zone boundary and at the Main Zone/ Upper Zone boundary  (Kruger and Marsh 1982; Kruger et al. 1986 ). Finally, the Bushveld granite was intruded Fig.  1  General location map and stratigraphic section for the Bushveld Complex showing the breccia pipe location  (Willmore et al. 2000)  into the center of the complex at 2.04 Ga  (Walraven 1988) . Although these three members of the Bushveld igneous suite are spatially and temporally related, their genetic relationships are unknown. The layered rocks of the Bushveld Complex form a lopolithic intrusion which is 7-9 km thick. The stratigraphic divisions of the Bushveld Complex are described in detail by  Eales and Cawthorn (1996) . The stratigraphy of the Bushveld is, from the bottom up: (1) the Lower Zone, (2) the Critical Zone, (3) the Main Zone, and (4) the Upper Zone (Fig.  1 ). The Lower Zone is 800-1,000 m thick and consists primarily of layers of pyroxenite, dunite, and harzburgite with some chromite with small amounts of intercumulus plagioclase, biotite, and clinopyroxene. The boundary between the Lower Zone and the Critical Zone occurs where the modal abundance of interstitial plagioclase increases to roughly 4%. The Critical Zone is split into the Upper Critical and Lower Critical zones, with the boundary between the two occurring where plagioclase appears as an euhedral (cumulus) phase. The boundary between the Critical Zone and the Main Zone is usually taken to be the base of the Merensky reef, and that of the Upper Zone the pyroxenite marker, following the suggestion of  Kruger (1994) .

Geology of the breccia pipe
The studied breccia pipe crosscuts the rhythmically layered, mottled anorthosite of the Upper Critical Zone of the Bushveld Complex  (Ferguson and McCarthy 1970) , about 2.4 km above the base of the complex (Fig.  1 ). The pipe is exposed in cross section along a gully wall formed by a small stream (Fig.  2 ). The body is roughly circular in map view and has a diameter of about 10 m. The contact between the pipe and wall rock is generally very well preserved, and is at a high angle to regional layering. Sub-angular to subrounded blocks of Bushveld lithologies are fit tightly together in the body of the pipe (Fig.  3a ). The blocks are comprised primarily of norites and anorthosites, with lesser amounts of pyroxenite (Fig.  3b ). The blocks in the pipe are up to about 15 cm in diameter but range up to 1 m in length. Blocks with high aspect ratios tend to have their long axis vertically oriented (Fig.  3c ). The larger blocks are concentrated in the center of the pipe, and there is a gradation to the eastern side with the smallest blocks along the eastern contact (Fig.  3d ). All of the material in the pipe comprises Bushveld lithologies. In addition to the transported blocks, fragments of the local anorthositic host rock have been entrained in the pipe. These fragments are angular and occur near the periphery of the pipe (Fig.  3e ), and appear to have been ripped from the wall and entrained in the breccia pipe. A pegmatite fills much of the interstitial areas of the pipe and occurs as veinlets crosscutting some of the pipe blocks (Fig.  3f ). The pegmatite is melanocratic and is comprised primarily of clino-and orthopyroxenes, generally 0.5 to 1.0 cm in length but locally up to 3 cm in length. At the breccia pipe-host rock contact, the matrix pegmatite forms local apophyses up to about 10 cm in length into the host rock. The pegmatite also extends bilaterally from the pipe as dikes extending well into the surrounding, layered series rocks. One pegmatitic area located approximately 15 m west of the pipe is associated with a zone of brecciation 3•6 m, filled by fragments of wall rock  (Ferguson and McCarthy 1970) . The region surrounding the pipe is characterized by local, crosscutting ultramafic veins. The contact of the Fig.  2  Composite picture of breccia pipe exposure pipe contains small zones of brecciation wherein host rock forms angular fragments in a pegmatitic matrix. The breccia pipe is surrounded by a series of ring fractures in the host rock which are especially well exposed around the western side of the pipe where they are associated with ultramafic pegmatitic mineralization. These fractures are spaced at approximately 10-cm in-crements from the rim of the pipe to a distance of about 2-4 m from the pipe (Fig.  4 ). Such ring fractures have been described for other breccia pipe exposures  (Calvari 2000) . The western portion of the exposure has previously been described as having been subject to intense amphibolitization, such that remnant outlines of blocks can be discerned in some areas through a darker overprint  (Ferguson and McCarthy 1970) . In fact, this amphibolitization is locally surficial (Fig.  3e ): when a surface is freshly exposed one can discern more features and the dark coloration appears to be a patina. In thin section, pyroxenes in these rocks are generally fresh, and have been only locally altered to amphibole along some grain edges.

Methods
Whole-rock composition data were collected from 18 breccia pipe blocks selected to cover the full compositional range of the pipe, as well as from four samples from the host rock adjacent to the pipe. Major-element abundances were determined by direct current plasma optical emission spectrometry (DCP-OES). Samples were prepared by the methods of  Klein et al. (1991)  on an ARL Fisons Spectroscan 7 DCP at Duke University. Trace-element abundances were obtained by VG-Elemental Quadrapole-3 inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) at Duke University. Sample digestion and operating parameters are described in  Meurer et al. (1999) . Mineral composition data for feldspars in breccia pipe blocks and in adjacent country rocks were collected by microprobe analysis at Duke University on a Cameca Camebax electron microprobe. Typical analysis conditions were 15-KeV acceleration voltage, 15-nA beam current, and 5-10 lm beam diameter. Peak and background counting times were 30 s on peak, and 15 s each on the high and low backgrounds.

Results
Major-and trace-element composition data are presented in Tables  1  and 2 . Major-element geochemical data for breccia pipe norites, anorthosite, pegmatite groundmass and Critical Zone host rock are plotted on an AFS diagram, together with Bushveld compositional fields which are defined by $120 samples from the Upper Critical Zone and Lower Main Zone  (Scoon and Mitchell 1994; Fig. 5) . Breccia pipe anorthosites plot within the anorthosite field. However, the breccia pipe norite compositions extend from the norite field, through the melanorite field towards more Fe-rich compositions. This range in noritic major-element composition may indicate a range in stratigraphic origin for the noritic blocks. Pegmatitic material analyzed from the breccia pipe falls into the Fe-poor end of the pegmatoid field defined on the plot. In Fig.  6 , anorthite content of feldspars from blocks within the pipe is compared to that of feldspar in the host rock, collected immediately adjacent to the pipe. Mean anorthite content for breccia pipe plagioclase is $An 83 , significantly higher than the mean anorthite content for country-rock feldspars ($An 75 ). Plagioclase in the breccia pipe rock was generally unzoned, as determined petrographically and by microprobe analysis. Anorthite content of breccia pipe feldspars is equivalent to that of feldspars in the Lower Critical Zone, about 800-1,000 m below the level of the breccia pipe. These results are compatible with the hypothesis that the   Trace-element data from breccia pipe blocks were normalized to composite Critical Zone whole-rock compositions for each rock type  (Willmore et al. 2000) . Incompatible trace-element plots for anorthosites and norites are shown in Fig.  7 . There is variation among norite samples (Fig.  7a ), yet all are relatively depleted in P, and strongly enriched in the highly soluble element K. Norites are also generally enriched to varying degrees in the more soluble elements La, Ce, Ba, and Rb. Normative pyroxene is lower in the  Willmore et al. (2000)  norites than in the pipe norites, and thus breccia pipe norites appear relatively enriched in the elements which preferentially partition into pyroxene (e.g., Y). The incompatible trace-element plot for anorthosites (Fig.  7b ) shows similar general characteristics: a strong relative enrichment is observed in the soluble LILE and LREE elements K, La, Ce and Sm whereas the immobile elements Nb, Ta, Th, Hf and P are not enriched. REE plots for breccia pipe anorthosites (Fig.  8a ) show LREE enrichments and a positive Eu anomaly relative to in-situ Critical Zone anorthosite compositions. REE plots for the breccia pipe norites show dissimilarities in trace-element signatures, yet all samples show enrichment in aqueous fluid soluble elements relative to Critical Zone norites (e.g., alkalis and LREEs; Fig.  8b ). The norite REE plot allows two groups to be distinguished: samples 4.10 and 4.7 are characterized by a negative Eu anomaly whereas samples 4.6, 4.11 and 4.12 have a positive Eu anomaly. This variation reflects the difference in bulk compositions in the norites, as seen on the AFS plot (Fig.  5 ): the samples whose compositions plot nearest the anorthosite field have a positive Eu anomaly, whereas those which plot in or near the norite field have a negative Eu anomaly, reflecting the variation in modal plagioclase. Figure  9  shows the data for ultramafic pegmatites contained within the pipe, normalized to ultramafic pegmatoids from the Upper Critical Zone  (Scoon and Mitchell 1994) . Samples analyzed are in good agreement, with parallel patterns showing enrichment in the mobile elements K, Sr and Y relative to in-situ Critical Zone pegmatoids  (Scoon and Mitchell 1994) .

Discussion
Evidence for volatile-induced fluidization of the blocks Fluidization has commonly been invoked as an emplacement mechanism for kimberlite diatremes (e.g.,  Lorenz 1975; McCallum 1985) , and in this paper we support the suggestion of  Ferguson and McCarthy (1970)  that the Bushveld breccia pipe may have been similarly emplaced. Fluidization can simply be viewed as an equilibrium state wherein the buoyant weight of a bed of particles is balanced by the upward drag force on the particles created by an upwardly moving fluid  (Wilson 1984; Davidson et al. 1985) . Fluidized bed technology has been extensively reviewed in the engineering literature, but little research has been conducted on fluidization in natural geologic processes. However, geologists have long observed clastic geologic materials behaving as a fluid (e.g., ignimbrites), and fluidization has become a common explanation for some geologic features. There are two lines of evidence which suggest the breccia pipe may have been emplaced by volatileinduced fluidization: observable physical features within and around the pipe, and geochemical features of the blocks from the pipe.

Physical evidence
If fluidization emplaced the blocks in the breccia pipe from elsewhere in the stratigraphy of the complex, one of several textural arrangements may be expected, depending on the velocity of the fluid and on characteristics of the blocks. For example, when fluidized particles move up a pipe-shaped container, the edges of the pipe retard the movement of the clasts nearest the edges of the pipe, causing particles in the center to have the greatest velocity  (Davidson et al. 1985) . This type of velocity gradient causes a size gradient in the pipe, with smaller blocks near the margins and larger blocks at the center  (Davidson et al. 1985) . Such a lateral size gradient is clearly preserved within the pipe (Fig.  3d ;  Ferguson and McCarthy 1970) . Blocks with high aspect ratios are generally oriented vertically, with their long axis perpendicular to the general stratigraphy of the complex and parallel to the long axis of the pipe (Fig.  3c ), indicating vertical fluid movement. Seeing that the blocks maintain this orientation, one can infer that there was a significant solid fraction to the material which moved up the pipe during emplacement, such that the blocks did not significantly shift during cessation of fluid flow.

Geochemical evidence
If a volatile-rich igneous fluid was responsible for the emplacement of the Bushveld breccia pipe, then certain geochemical signatures can be expected. For example, the enrichment of those incompatible elements soluble in igneous fluids (e.g., K, La, Ce, Sr, Ba) relative to immobile incompatible elements (e.g., P, Nb, Ta, Zr, Hf) has been interpreted as suggesting the presence of igneous fluids in pegmatoids in the Bushveld Complex (e.g.,  Boudreau et al. 1986; Cawthorn and Poulton 1988) . By comparison, island-arc rocks are generally enriched in soluble elements (e.g., Ba, K, Sr, Sm), likely due to volatile-induced flux melting  (Pearce 1983; Wilson 1984) . Incompatible trace-element plots for norites and anorthosites show that the breccia pipe blocks are generally enriched in these and other soluble elements relative to similar host rocks, although norites show some intersample variation. Breccia pipe blocks (Fig.  7 ) are enriched in K, Rb, Sm, and Y. By contrast, a negative anomaly is observed for the immobile P, whereas the immobile elements Nb, Ti, Ta, Th, and Hf have values which nearly equal those of similar host cumulates. If these variations were due to variations in trapped liquid abundances, one would expect all incompatible elements, soluble and insoluble, to be enriched to a similar degree. Instead, these signatures are consistent with the blocks having been preferentially enriched in fluid-soluble incompatible elements from the transporting fluid. REE plots of breccia pipe norites and anorthosites have a slight negative slope, showing some enrichment in LREEs relative to in-situ Bushveld rocks (Fig.  8 ). The variation among norite samples appears to reflect majorelement chemistry: those samples which plot near the anorthosite field have a positive Eu anomaly, whereas those which plot near the melanorite field show a negative Eu anomaly. However, all the samples are strongly enriched in Nd, Y, Dy, and Er. The breccia pipe blocks have higher normative pyroxene than in-situ norites analyzed by  Willmore et al. (2000) . Though there is not conclusive evidence of fluid enrichment of soluble elements in the norites, our data are not inconsistent with such an interpretation. Analysis of blocks of ultramafic pegmatite (Fig.  9 ) shows soluble-element enrichment, with K and Sr concentrations greater than twice those of in-situ pegmatites  (Scoon and Mitchell 1994) . The concentrations of immobile elements P and Ti are about equal to in-situ values. The breccia pipe pegmatites are also enriched in the immobile element Y. The hypothesis that a volatile-rich phase formed the breccia pipe by violent degassing is supported by geochemical data obtained from the transported blocks within the pipe. Major-element data also lend validity to the hypothesis that the relative enrichment of soluble trace elements in the pipe anorthosites is due to mobilization of volatile-rich fluids. For example, Fig.  5  shows that there is little major-element compositional variation amongst the samples. This result is expected: bulk-rock major-element concentrations are buffered by modal mineralogy, and chemical variations due to exposure to a volatile-rich fluid phase are concentrated in the trace elements, and not in the major elements. Furthermore, the more anorthitic plagioclase compositions of the blocks as compared to the host rock indicate that the blocks were not derived locally but were likely transported from below. It is possible that the plagioclase became more calcic during emplacement through late ionic exchange with a chlorine-rich fluid (e.g., Orville 1972): However, optical examination and microprobe analysis of plagioclase show them not to be significant zoned. Hence, it seems unlikely that the plagioclase could have reached textural and compositional equilibrium with only a brief exposure to propellant fluid during a rapid pipe-forming event. However, it is conceivable, and perhaps even likely, that the relatively higher An content of the pipe blocks is due to extensive ion exchange with fluid which took place between the plagioclase and a late fluid prior to the disruption event which formed the blocks. The expected long interval in which the fluid abundance and pressure was increasing in the source region would allow a longer equilibration time to produce unzoned, high-calcium plagioclase. In either scenario, most blocks were not derived from the immediate adjacent host, but were transported.

Mechanisms of breccia pipe formation
In the following discussion we consider the physical mechanisms for the formation of the Bushveld breccia pipe. We consider how overpressure can develop in vapor-saturated interstitial liquids as crystallization proceeds. We then find the minimum velocities the exsolved fluid would have to have achieved to lift the blocks seen in the breccia pipe. In the Appendix, a basic calculation demonstrates that the overpressure generated would be sufficient to generate these minimum velocities. Finally, we make a comparison between the Bushveld breccia pipe and kimberlite pipes, leading to a discussion of our proposed model for the emplacement of the Bushveld breccia pipe.

Development of overpressure from crystallization
Fluid overpressure can develop by a combination of two processes: (1) compaction of the crystal pile, such that any interstitial fluid supports a lithostatic load in excess of the hydrostatic pressure on the fluid, and (2) crystallization overpressure and fluid separating from an interstitial liquid which cannot escape from the crystal pile as fast as it is being generated. In the following we examine the second cause in more detail. As anhydrous minerals crystallize from a vapor-saturated liquid, separation of a volatile-rich fluid must occur. This can lead to an overpressured situation. For example,  Burnham (1979)  has shown how differentiation-induced redistribution of water in a magma body can lead to local vapor saturation and to the rapid upward migration of the vapor. Furthermore, the effect of degassing a fluid on magma pressures and on the eruption behavior of a shallow magma chamber has been examined by  Tait et al. (1989) .  Boudreau (1992)  broadened the discussion of the physical effects of the exsolution of a volatile phase by examining how degassing may cause overpressure in a solidifying crystal pile. In this study, we apply a crystallization model in order to determine how much overpressure is developed during the crystallization of a volatile, saturated interstitial liquid which crystallizes isochorically (constant volume). We applied the PELE silicate-liquid crystallization model of  Boudreau (1999) , a PC-platform program based on the MELTS thermodynamic model of  Ghiorso and Sack (1995) . To approximate geochemical conditions of the crystallizing cumulate, Bushveld parental bulk compositions  (Eales and Cawthorn 1996)  were modified to represent the crystal-liquid assemblages which may have evolved in the crystal pile (Table  3 ). For example, to construct composition 1 a Critical Zone composition was allowed to crystallize in PELE until the first pyroxene crystallized. Composition 1 is then a 60:40 combination of the composition of the first pyroxene to crystallize and the liquid in equilibrium with these first crystals. Similarly, for composition 2, a bulk composition of 40% first pyroxene + 60% equilibrium liquid was used. Finally, for composition 3 a bulk composition of 60% first plagioclase + 40% equilibrium liquid was used. Crystallization of these bulk composition was modeled under both dry and water-saturated conditions. In each of the dry runs, isochoric crystallization results in no overpressure above the starting pressure of 2,000 bar. In fact, pressure on the interstitial liquid drops dramatically. This decrease in pressure results from a net crystallization contraction in most crystallizing silicate phases -the solids take up less volume than the liquid  (Peterson 1987) . By contrast, in those isochoric runs where the crystallizing interstitial liquid is initially water saturated, significant overpressure can develop (Fig.  10 ). In all three cases, fluids were exsolved continually over the course of crystallization, but overpressure developed only when plagioclase joined the liquidus. This result is due to a relatively higher molar volume of plagioclase compared with that of the interstitial liquid. Thus, for overpressure to develop, the combined crystallization expansion of plagioclase and exsolution of water is required to overcome the crystallization contraction of the other crystallizing phases. Furthermore, the isochoric P-T plot of fluid-saturated magmas demonstrates that an overpressure of about 400 bar can be generated. Plagioclase-saturated liquids develop overpressures immediately, because plagioclase is the first mineral to crystallize, but less overpressure is developed. The requirement that plagioclase joins the liquidus for crystallization overpressure to develop is significant because the breccia pipe is located stratigraphically about 800 to 1,000 m above where plagioclase first appears as an abundant interstitial mineral: it is a modest but obvious increase in the amount of interstitial plagioclase which marks the base of the Lower Critical Zone. Thus, the model results are consistent with our geochemical data: the plagioclase analyzed from pipe blocks has an average An content which does not disagree with an origin near the base of the Lower Critical Zone.

Fluidization velocity
The fluidization velocity required to emplace the breccia pipe blocks can be determined by considering the minimum fluid velocity such that the upward drag force counteracts the gravitational force. Thus, to provide an estimate of minimum fluid ascent velocities, fluidization velocities are calculated using empirical equations for the turbulent suspension of non-spherical particles  (Riba et al. 1978) , such that fluidization velocity, m, is expressed as:   where d is the diameter of the particle, l is the viscosity of the fluid, and q f is the density of the fluid. C I represents the inertial drag coefficient. For fluids with a sphericity factor (w) less than 0.8  (Howard 1989 ), C I is approximated by 2:53À2:83e 2:3w . This C I value assumes a Reynold's number of between 200 and 500, a low-end assumption for our scenario. Finally, Mm is the density ratio, and is equal to q b Àq f q f where q b is the density of the block. The density of the volatiles will be assumed to be that of water (1,000 kg/m 3 ), and the density of the blocks is assumed to be 2,700 kg/m 3 . The assumption that the density of the fluids is that of water forms the low end-member scenario. Of course, the fluid here will not be pure water and will probably be significantly denser than water due to dissolved species carried in it. The effects of fluid densities ranging from that of water to 2,500 kg/m 3 are considered in more detail in Fig.  11 . The acceleration due to gravity (g) is 9.81 m/s 2 , and the viscosity of the liquid is taken to be that of water, 0.01 Pas. Although these equations were derived for small (micron scale) particles, the values obtained have generally been deemed acceptable for much larger geologic materials (e.g.,  Wilson 1984; McCallum 1985) . v ¼ l dq f 12:0 C I 2 þ0:0114 d 3 q 2 f g l 2 ! Mv w 3:2 C I ! À 12:0 C I ! The results of the velocity calculations are shown in Fig.  11 , where minimum fluidization velocity is plotted for various conditions. Block diameter is plotted against velocity for different shape factors (Fig.  11a ), showing an expected result of greater diameters and greater sphericity requiring greater emplacement velocities. It is useful to consider ascent velocities for particles with different fluid densities (Fig.  11b ) to account for dissolved species increasing the density of the exsolved phase. As fluid density increases, the minimum fluidization velocity required to emplace the blocks decreases. Ascent velocity must be greater than the minimum fluidization velocity, so the values shown in the figure define the lower boundary of velocity conditions. Maximum velocity is unconstrained, but  Fink and Kieffer (1993)  calculate a maximum expansion rate of 170 m/s for pyroclastic eruptions. Our values seem to be in line with these estimates, with the most spherical blocks (shape factor=0.9) having minimum fluidization velocities reaching about 120 m/s. The controlling factors in calculating the conditions which existed during formation of the Bushveld breccia pipe seem to be the shape of the ascending blocks, and the nature and composition of the ascending liquid. If the volatile fluid included significant dissolved material, then both the viscosity and density of the resultant liquid would increase, giving more transport ability and decreasing the required minimum velocity. The most realistic minimum ascent velocities are obtained for an ascending liquid which was mostly volatile with some dissolved ultramafic melt component, allowing the degassing crystal pile to move blocks through a spouting flow. However, the calculations do not take into account the complications of having more than one type of block being fluidized. Our calculations do not allow for variations in xenolith density, and the irregularity of their shape may not be well expressed by sphericity factors. Calculations presented in the Appendix show that crystallization overpressure can generate the minimum fluidization velocities calculated here.

Kimberlite comparison
The Bushveld breccia pipe can be compared to kimberlite pipes based on their physical form, geochemical characteristics, the role of fluid overpressure, and emplacement mechanisms. Kimberlite bodies are pipeshaped with steep ($80-84°), sharp contacts with the surrounding country rocks  (Novikov and Slobodskoy 1978) . Kimberlite pipes often occur within a network of fractures, and are generally associated with linear dikes  (Kurslauskis et al. 1998) . Kimberlite pipe xenoliths are transported from below or above, such that blocks transported from below tend to be rounded whereas those falling from above tend to be angular  (Novikov and Slobodskoy 1978) . Kimberlite xenoliths are commonly flattened, with a predominant long axis between 0.3 and 0.7 m long  (Novikov and Slobodskoy 1978 ;   Kurslauskis et al. 1998) . Locally derived xenoliths are concentrated around the periphery of the pipe whereas those transported from below tend to be concentrated preferentially in the center of the kimberlite pipe (e.g.,  Novikov and Slobodskoy 1978) . Kimberlites also may be surrounded by breccias of the country rocks in the exocontact where the matrix is comprised of the kimberlite pipe matrix  (Novikov and Slobodskoy 1978) . The Bushveld breccia pipe has similar features. It is characterized by a vertical pipe-like body, emplaced along a linear set of ultramafic dikes, and in a network of fractures. Breccia pipe blocks are arranged in a way similar to kimberlite pipes: angular host-rock fragments are at the edge of the pipe whereas rounded, commonly elongate blocks are in the center. The periphery of the pipe is comprised of an angular breccia, where the matrix appears to be the same, pegmatitic matrix filling in the interstices of the breccia pipe, similar to exocontact regions in kimberlite pipes. There is a vigorous debate regarding whether kimberlite pipes are emplaced via a fluidization mechanism resulting from exsolving CO 2 and H 2 O or from a phreatomagmatic process(e.g.,  Kurslauskis et al. 1998; Beard et al. 1999) . Velocities for the phreatomagmatic emplacement of breccia pipes have been experimentally determined to be between 200 and 400 m/s  (Zimanowski et al. 1991; Kurslauskis et al. 1998) . A fluidization model discussed by  Novikov and Slobodskoy (1978)  gives emplacement velocities of about 100-200 m/s. These models agree with our minimum fluidization velocities calculated for emplacement of the blocks in the Bushveld breccia pipe. A comparison between kimberlite pipe and Bushveld breccia pipe trace-element geochemistry shows that, Fig.  12  Schematic illustration of overpressure development and pipe emplacement. The base of the chamber is solid degassed cumulates, with no porosity. This region is overlain by a region of crystal mush, wherein exsolving fluids migrate upwards along a pressure gradient to a fluid saturation front within the mush zone (crystals and liquid). Overpressure develops beneath the fluid saturation front, leading to the explosive emplacement of the breccia pipe, and the possible release of volatiles back into the main magma chamber although both are enriched in soluble elements, kimberlite pipes are generally enriched to a much greater degree (e.g.,  Beard et al. 1999; O'Brien and Tyni 1999) . However, spidergrams for both have a negative slope, and pronounced positive Ba and negative P anomalies  (O'Brien and Tyni 1999) . Thus, a comparison between physical characteristics of kimberlite pipes and the Bushveld breccia pipe holds up quite well. The trace-element geochemistry has some similarities, but differences can be explained by the different sources for each, and therefore we present a model for the emplacement of the Bushveld breccia pipe based on the fluidization model for kimberlite emplacement. We envision a scenario which is illustrated in Fig.  12  for the explosive emplacement of the breccia pipe due to overpressure from exsolved fluids. Fluid saturation in the interstitial liquid of the crystal pile occurs after volatile concentrations are increased in the liquid as the result of the crystallization of anhydrous phases. The net volume change on crystallization is usually negative  (Peterson 1987) , leading to a net contraction but, when fluids are exsolved and plagioclase crystallizes, the net volume change is positive and a crystallization overpressure develops. This overpressure is in addition to any overpressure from derived compaction in the crystallizing pile. Thus, as seen in Fig.  12 , the base of the chamber comprises solid degassed cumulates, with no porosity. This region is overlain by a region of crystal mush, wherein exsolving fluids migrate upwards along a pressure gradient to a fluid saturation front within the mush zone (crystals and liquid). Overpressure develops beneath the fluid-saturation front, leading to the eventual explosive emplacement of the breccia pipe and the possible release of volatile components back into the main magma chamber. Because the Lower and Critical zones are characterized by modal layering, it is likely that different bulk-rock compositions will have different solidus temperatures -some lithologies will be more permeable to fluid transport than others. Fluids are likely to collect in those rocks which have significant residual porosity. These gas-rich regions may be interconnected via pegmatitic channel ways and fractures. Conversely, rocks with low permeability can act as ''caps'' preventing the escape of fluids. When an escape channel does develop, the fluid escapes violently. The presence of ring fractures suggests the exposed host rock (as with the blocks themselves) was significantly solidified such that the fracturing was not annealed subsequent to pipe formation. This suggests that the fluid-source region was gasrich and silicate-liquid poor.

Conclusions
This study supports earlier contentions that exsolved fluids can create significant overpressures in a solidifying crystal pile  (Burnham 1979; Boudreau 1992) . Furthermore, we add to the growing body of work supporting the importance of exsolved fluids migrating upwards as they harvest and concentrate any PGE which may be present in layered intrusions. Thus, we reiterate the ideas of volatile-induced PGE enrichment supported in Stumpfl's work. In fact, we propose that, given the Cl nature of these propellant fluids (e.g.,  Willmore et al. 2000) , late reaction of this fluid with host rock can result in an iron-rich solution. Indeed, the overpressured gas may effectively ''steam clean'' host rock of pyroxene when allowed to fully react with hotter rock as it migrates through the crystal pile. The ultramafic material found between the blocks in the pipe, and found in pegmatites and veins surrounding the pipe and elsewhere in the Bushveld complex, is reasonably inferred to be late precipitates from this Fe-rich fluid.