The lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) based on rocking-chair concept between intercalated cathode/anode pairs have achieved great success in the market of smartphones and laptops. 
[ 1 ]  However, although the replacement of metallic lithium (Li) with graphite enhanced the safety of the lithium ion cells, it also signifi cantly lowers the specifi c capacity and energy density, which is below the US Department of Energy Vehicle Technologies Program's long-term target for the secondary batteries.  [ 2 ]  Therefore, besides the successful commercialization of graphite anode, the academic research in metallic Li anode has never been in a sluggish during the past 40 years  [ 3 ]  to realize the ultimate replacement of internal combustion vehicles by electric vehicles. In fact, the Li metal is considered as the "Holy Grail" of energy storage systems due to its extremely high theoretical specifi c capacity (3860 mAh g -1 ), low gravimetric density (0.59 g cm -3 ), and lowest negative redox potential (-3.040 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode). Thus, Li metal exhibits superior theoretical performance than any other anode materials (such as silicon,  [ 4 ]  germanium (Ge),  [ 5 ]  metal oxides/sulfi des,  [ 6 ]  nanocarbons,  [ 7 ]  and their composites,  [ 8 ]  etc.). The bright prospects give rise to worldwide interests in the metallic Li for the next generation energy storage systems, including highly considered rechargeable metallic Li batteries such as Li-O 2 and Li-sulfur (Li-S) batteries. However, the formation of Li dendrites induced by inhomogeneous distribution of current density on the Li metal anode and the concentration gradient of Li ions at the electrolyte/electrode interface is a crucial issue that hinders the practical demonstration of high-energy-density metallic Li batteries.  [9] [10] [11] [12]  On one hand, Li dendrites may pierce the polymer separator, resulting in short circuit and subsequent thermal runaway of the cell. Meanwhile, the growth of Li dendrites also leads to the formation of incomplete solid electrolyte interfaces (SEI), exposure of fresh Li to electrolytes, and the re-formation of thicker SEI fi lms. Since SEI mechanical strength, and noninfl ammability, the Li dendrite is expected to be fully suppressed under high stress strain.  [ 23 ]  However, the polymer-based and all-solid-state electrolytes possess much lower ionic conductivities than liquid electrolytes at room temperature and ultrahigh interfacial resistance due to the poor wettability to active phase. Consequently, the as-prepared LIBs with solid electrolytes can only be operated at over 60 °C (the melting point of PEO) for acceptable cell performance, which is suitable for stationary applications such as smart grids but diffi cult for electrical transportation pursuing high-power capability. Compared with these top-down strategies involving sophisticated considerations, bottom-up route with rational architectural design of metallic anode materials is another effi cient method to mediate the growth behavior of deposited Li during charge-discharge process, which sheds a new light on the understanding of Li dendrite formation and provides a promising nanostructured metallic Li-based anode for high-energy-density rechargeable batteries. Generally, Li metal is widely employed as the anode of Li batteries. As a 2D material without micro-/nanostructure, Li metal anode confronts the deadly risk of dendrite growth. Herein, we proposed a novel three-dimensional (3D) nanostructured anode with metallic Li contained in fi brous Li 7 B 6 matrix ( Figure  1  a) as promising anode materials to prevent the dendrite growth. Comparing with other microstructured anode materials,  [ 24 ]  the nanostructured anode is with a large specifi c area, which reduces the current density to suppress the dendrite growth  [ 25 ]  (Figure  1  b , the calculation principle is detailed described in Supporting Information). However, once the Li deposit initiates, it would grow continuously because Li deposit in the initial time is with a small size that holds a strong electric fi eld strength, thus favoring the adsorption and deposition of lithium ions (Figure  1 b ). When the Li deposit size is beyond that of the matrix, Li + adsorption and deposition ability of the deposits will be below the matrix and then Li + deposits on the matrix rather than on the dendrites continually. Thus, the nanostructured LiB alloy anode not only reduces the current density, which decreases the growth velocity of Li deposits, but also limits the fi nal size of deposited Li on the nanostructured matrix, which leads to the dendrite-free morphology at macroscale (Figure  1 c ). Consequently, the Li deposits on the nanostructured anode with metallic Li embeded in fi brous Li 7 B 6 matrix are always with smaller size than that on the plate Li metal anode. Beyond the size effect of the Li deposits, the 3D fi brous structure of Li 7 B 6 provides free space to accommodate electrolyte to reduce the concentration gradient of Li ions,  [ 26 ]  therefore, the formation of Li dendrites is suppressed. The 3D nanostructured anode with dendrite-free morphology and highly stable interfaces between the electrode and electrolyte could serve as a promising anode candidate for high-energy-density systems with good security. The nanostructured anode with metallic Li contained in fi brous Li 7 B 6 matrix reported herein is fabricated from thermal reaction and composed of free Li and alloyed Li with chemical formula of Li 7 B 6 •7.6Li. The electrochemical phase evolution and corresponding structural properties of nanostructured anode at different charge/discharge stages were probed. A cell confi guration of nanostructured anode as the working electrode, plate Li metal as the counter and reference electrode in the carbonate ester-based electrolyte (the composition was described in the Experimental Section) was constructed for electrochemically driving the phase evolution of nanostructured anode with metallic Li entrapped in fi brous Li 7 B 6 matrix under a galvanostatic current density of 0.3 mA cm -2 , elaborating the multi-step and multi-phase de-lithiation and lithiation behaviors (   and plate Li metal anode, respectively (t 1 < t 2 , R 1 < R 2 ) . of 0.80 V corresponds to the extraction of combined Li from the Li 7 B 6 phase. However, there is only one plateau around 5 mV in the lithiation process, indicating that the Li ions could not be alloyed with B to recover Li 7 B 6 phase at room temperature.  [ 27 ]  This proposed structural evolution of nanostructured anode at different charge-discharge stages (denoted as 1#-10# in the galvanostatic profi le) was confi rmed by ex-situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis (Figure  2 b, c ). The initial nanostructured anode is composed of free Li and Li 7 B 6 with the fi brous Li 7 B 6 frameworks fully covered by free Li occupying the interspace of Li 7 B 6 fi bers (1#). With the de-lithiation, the peak of Li becomes weak (2#-4#) and after complete depletion of free Li as galvanostatic profi le indicated, the XRD refl ection of free Li disappears and the fi brous Li 7 B 6 with a diameter of 100-200 nm gradually exposed (5#). With deep de-lithiation to fully extract Li in Li 7 B 6 phase (6#, 7#), amorphous B phase remained with well-preserved fi brous morphology and diameter, illustrating the structure stability of Li 7 B 6 /B scaffold (8#). During the subsequent lithiation (9#, 10#), only free Li with lower crystallization and corresponding smaller size of around 100-300 nm deposits on the inert B skeleton while no crystallized Li 7 B 6 phase is generated (10#).  [ 27 ]  When Li ions are reduced at the surface of such inert scaffold, the deposition of free Li could only be initiated at the current collector side to accept suffi cient electrons and then epitaxy of Li on B develops to membrane side since the free Li is conductive. Both the nanostructured fi brous Li 7 B 6 and B framework small 2014, 10, No. 21, 4257-4263  have enough space for effi cient deposition of free Li. Compared to pure B framework, combined Li 7 B 6 possesses higher electrical conductivity to serve as highly effi cient electron pathways and thus more ideal nanostructured anode scaffold without dendrite issues if the charging potential is limited to lower than 0.80 V in practical applications for high-energydensity systems. The stabilities of both electrode/electrolyte interface and interfacial transfer behavior are pivotal for the high efficient cycling of metal anode. Symmetrical cells are always employed to investigate the interfacial behaviors of metal anodes.  [ 28 ]  Herein, two symmetrical cells of plate Li metal or nanostructured metallic Li anodes in combination with two electrolytes of carbonate ester-based electrolyte and polysulfi de electrolyte (the composition was described in Experimental Section) were fabricated to simulate the interfacial stability and transfer phenomena in Li-ion battery and Li-S battery applications, respectively. The carbonate ester electrolyte is commonly used for Li-ion battery due to its effectiveness to build a stable interface at the anode surface. Therefore, both nanostructured metallic Li and plate Li metal electrodes exhibit low voltage fl uctuation ( Figure  3 a ). However, nanostructured metallic Li electrode displays ameliorative polarization and much lower impedance than plate Li metal electrode during the whole cycling course, indicating superior transfer properties at the interface (Figure  3 c ). The rapid electron transfer is attributed to the long-range conductive fi brous Li 7 B 6 framework, while the interconnected hierarchical pores among the 3D scaffolds benefi t the fully penetration of electrolytes and fast ion diffusion. Considering the applications in Li-S batteries, in which highly reactive Li easily reduces the soluble intermediates in form of polysulfi des into insoluble and insulative Li 2 S covering the anode surface to cause loss of active material and high interfacial resistance as a key issue,  [ 29 ]  the replacement of plate metallic Li anode is urgent. In polysulfi de electrolytes, metallic Li exhibits an irregular potential fl uctuation and high impedance due to the complex reaction between polysulfi des and Li metal to form inhomogeneous deposited electron/ ion inhibitor of Li 2 S as high transfer barrier with poor polarization (Figure  3 b, d ). While nanostructured metallic Li electrodes shows regular polarization curves and much lower resistance, suggesting a stable and thin interface is formed on nanosized Li embedded in fi brous framework. This can be ascribed to lower concentration gradient of both Li ions and polysulfi des to suppress Li 2 S growing into bulk insulating phase. Consequently, the LiB electrode is highly considered to replace metallic Li anode in Li-S batteries for superior cell performance and stability. The 3D nanostructured anode with metallic Li contained in fi brous Li 7 B 6 matrix not only afford favorable interfacial stability and transfer properties, but also suppress the dendrite growth due to decreased areal current density and local small 2014, 10, No. 21, 4257-4263 concentration gradient of Li ions. Large Li dendrites are not available for both plate Li metal and nanostructured metallic Li electrodes at a low current density of 0.3 mA cm -2 , while the surface of plate Li metal is more coarse than nanostructured metallic Li anode (Figure  S1 ).  [ 25 ]  However, a large quantity of micro-sized Li dendrites is observed in case of plate Li metal anode while the nanostructured metallic Li anode is dendritefree when applying a huge current density of 10 mA cm -2 based on the surface of fl at electrode (Figure  3 e, f ). For plate Li metal electrode, the huge uptake of current results in strong local electrical fi eld and extremely high concentration gradient of Li ions as driven force for high throughput transportation of electrons from electrode and ions from electrolyte, which is benefi cial for the dendrite growth. While for the nanostructured metallic Li anode, its 3D nanostructure with abundant electrode/electrolyte interfaces lower the absolute local current density even though applying the same current as Li anode. Thus both the gradients of electrical fi eld and Li ion concentration at local regions are reduced to orders of magnitude towards increased Sand's time and dendritefree morphology.  [ 9, 30 ]  Also, due to the nanosized matrix, the growth of Li crystal is also self-restricted in principles shown in Figure  1  . The dendrite-free 3D nanostructured anode with metallic Li contained in fi brous Li 7 B 6 matrix circumvents the safety issue of next generation of energy storage systems with metal anodes ( e.g. rechargeable Li-O 2 and Li-S batteries) for a bright prospect. With a theoretical capacity of 1675 mAh g -1 , elemental S posing advantages of low cost, low toxicity, and abundant resource has been considered as one of the most promising alternative cathode materials. Its pair with metallic Li delivers ultrahigh theoretical energy density of 2567 Wh kg -1 , which is, however, hindered by low utilization of S and loss of active materials through dissolution of polysulfi des and their parasitic reaction with Li anode. To date, the utilization of S and dissolution of polysulfi des have been well addressed by various nanostructured cathode materials.  [ 31 ]  However, rare investigation on anode side, especially nanostructured Li anodes, has been developed to circumvent the aforementioned parasitic reaction issue of Li-S chemistry and dendrite problem like other metallic-Li batteries,  [ 32 ]  though several non-metal-based Li anodes were employed.  [ 33 ]  However, the critical role of the nanostructure on the morphology and electrochemical performance of the metallic Li anode was not well understood yet. Herein, the nanostructured anode with metallic Li embeded in fi brous Li 7 B 6 matrix is expected to be proof-of-concept of high security Li-S cells due to its stable interfacial properties and dendrite-free feature as well as low over potential vs. Li + /Li. The two-electrode Li-S cells to evaluate the practical potential of nanostructured anode were fabricated by employing carbon nanotube (CNT) based S composite cathode and routine lithium nitrate-free electrolyte (details were described in Experimental Section and our previous work  [ 34 ]  ). Unprecedented cycling life extended to 2000 cycles, low cyclic degradation of 0.032%, and over two times higher retention than Li anode are achieved by nanostructured anode (  coulombic effi ciency remains 91-92% during the long-term cycling due to the stable interfacial properties of nanostructured surface, which is much higher and more stable than that of the cell with Li anode. The high effi ciency is pivotal for conducting a practical device with low thermal throughput, combining with dendrite-free feature to guarantee high security. In the typical galvanostatic charge-discharge curves involving multi-electron-transfer chemistry, Li-S battery with nanostructured anode retains discharge plateaus around 2.06 V during 2000 cycles, indicating the stable transformation reactions (Figure  4 b ). In contrast, the voltage of cells with Li anode fades signifi cantly in 2000 cycles, which is ascribed to the inhomogeneous deposition Li 2 S blocking effi cient mass and charge transfer to retard favorable electrode kinetics (Figure  S3 ). The stable electrochemical reaction benefi cial from the nanostructure of LiB anode is also demonstrated by almost unchanged position and strength of redox peaks in cyclic voltammetry (CV) profi les after initial activation in the fi rst cycle (Figure  4 c ). Furthermore, the robust fi brous morphology of LiB anode is well preserved after 2000 cycles while many protuberances are observed on the cycled Li anode, which may possibly pierce the separator during prolonged cycles and induce hazardous risks (Figure  S4 ). Nanostructured metallic Li anode demonstrates high effi ciency, stable performance, and huge potential for high security Li-S batteries with high energy density. In summary, we engineered the 3D nanostructured electrode with metallic Li contained in fi brous Li 7 B 6 matrix as the anode materials of high-energy-density metallic Li-S batteries, which demonstrate unprecedentedly stable long cycling performance and high coulombic effi ciency beyond plate Li metal. The superior performance is attributed to unique 3D nanostructured Li 7 B 6 framework, which not only decreases the areal current density by improved surface area, but also provided enough space to accommodate the electrolyte and re-deposited Li to stabilize the concentration of Li ions. Thus, nanostructured anodes maintain a stable interfacial behavior, reduce the transfer resistance, and inhibit the growth of Li dendrites. These favorable features render typical Li-S batteries based on nanostructured anode with high stability and effi ciency, as well as unprecedented cycling life to 2000 cycles. Beyond Li-S batteries, the nanostructured anode with unique 3D nanostructure will shed a light on other advanced energy storage system involving metal anode, such as the Li-O 2 batteries and other metal-air battery, as well as next generation of Li batteries.

Experimental Section
Materials : The plate Li metal and nanostructured metallic anode with metallic Li contained in fi brous Li 7 B 6 matrix fabricated from thermal reaction are commercially available form China Energy Lithium Co., Ltd. The carbonate ester based electrolyte is 1.0 M lithium hexafl uorophosphate (LiPF 6 ) dissolving in a ternary solution of ethylene carbonate (EC) -dimethyl carbonate (DMC) -ethylene methyl carbonate (EMC) with a volumetric ratio of 1:1:1 and the ether based electrolyte employed for Li-S cell test is composed of lithium bis(trifl uoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) (1.0 M) as solvate and 1,3-dioxolane (DOL)/1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME) with a volumetric ratio of 1:1. Both of the two electrolytes were purchased from Zhangjiagang Guotai Huarong Chemical New Material Co., Ltd. To prepare polysulfi de electrolyte, elemental S and pure Li 2 S purchased from Alfa Aesar were mixed in a stoichiometric proportion to obtain Li 2 S 5 (0.1 M) dissolving in the ester based electrolytes. The CNTs were produced by chemical vapor deposition on Fe based catalyst in a fl uidized bed reactor and routine purifi cation by acid was carried out.  [ 35 ]  Structure Characterizations : Ex-situ XRD and SEM experiments are conducted by an X-ray diffractor (XRD, D8-Advance, Bruker, Germany) and a scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM 7401F, JEOL Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) at 3.0 kV. Electrochemical Measurement of Symmetrical Cells : A two-electrode cell confi guration using standard 2025 coin-type cells was used here, which were assembled in an Ar-fi lled glove box with O 2 and water content below 1 ppm. The electrochemically driven phase evolution is achieved in cells with LiB as the cathode and Li as the anode using carbonate ester-based electrolyte. The symmetrical cells were fabricated with plate Li metal or nanostructured metallic Li in the carbonate ester-based electrolyte and polysulfi de electrolyte, respectively. The galvanostatic mode, the CV (at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s -1 ) and EIS measurements (frequency range of 10 -2 -10 5 Hz) were performed on Solartron 1470E electrochemical workstation. Electrochemical Evaluation of Li-S Batteries : The fabrication of cathode materials and electrodes is demonstrated elsewhere.  [ 34 ]  The content of S is 64 wt% in the CNT@S composites. The CNT@S slurry was then coated onto an Al foam, which was punched into 13.0 mm disks with an areal loading of 4.6 mg cm -2 . Note that the electrolyte is lithium nitrate-free.