Introduction
Owing to soaring global energy consumption and serious environmental issues, renewable energy sources are the focus of much research and development worldwide. Hydrogen is regarded as a promising alternative to traditional fossil fuels because of its renewable nature, environment-friendly properties, and high energy density, especially when obtained from water electrolysis rather than coal and hydrocarbons (e.g., by well-assessed steam-reforming methods).  1, 2  Recently, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) by water electrolysis has attracted great interest, which is promising for hydrogen production via the use of renewable electric energy.  [3] [4] [5]  In this process, the electrocatalyst is the crucial issue, which must be capable of lowering electrochemical overpotential with high stability.  3  Although platinum group materials have proven to be the most efficient HER electrocatalysts, high cost and scarcity limit their large-scale applications. Hence, in recent years, two approaches have been adopted to optimize this process: (1)  improving the catalytic performance of Pt-based catalysts via nanoengineering strategies,  6, 7  and (2) developing low-cost alternatives for noble-metal HER catalysts.  5, [8] [9] [10] [11]  Recent studies have shown that transition metal carbides, such as molybdenum carbides, are promising electrocatalysts for HER because of their similar electronic and catalytic properties to Pt-group metals.  [12] [13] [14]  For those catalysts, abundant porosity,  13, 15  nanostructure  13, 16  and introduction of doping elements and conductive supports  [17] [18] [19] [20]  are important in optimizing their HER performance, all of which have been the focus of research in recent years. To date, the controllable preparation of nanostructured metal carbides with high specic surface area and large pore volume still remains a great challenge, because a high reaction temperature tends to be used in the synthesis process. Hence, new synthesis methods are continually being developed to solve this conundrum, such as solid-phase synthesis,  14, [20] [21] [22]  and in situ carburization of molybdenum salt supported on carbon materials.  16, 23  In our previous research, nanoporous Mo 2 C nanowires were developed through simply carburizing the Mo 3 O 10 (C 6 H 8 N)$2H 2 O precursor under an inert atmosphere, and good HER performance was achieved on this material.  13  These organic-inorganic hybrid nanowires developed by our group can provide the "sub-nanometer contact" between Mo 3 O 10 2À and protonated aniline and create a quasihomogeneous reaction environment for the carburization,  24, 25  which favors formation of the nanoporous and nanostructured Mo 2 C. However, the Mo 2 C electrocatalyst synthesized by this method oen possessed a relatively large particle-size (10-15 nm), as well as decient conductive carbon species aer carburization, which might prohibit the exposure of active Mo 2 C sites and slow the charge transfer kinetics during the HER process. Recently, we successfully developed heteronanowires of MoC-Mo 2 C with varying MoC/Mo 2 C by the same strategy,  26  and successfully improved the HER performance from our previous work on nanoporous Mo 2 C by effective electron regulation. In addition, similar strategies were also widely adopted to develop other electrocatalysts for different electrochemical processes, such as ORR.  [27] [28] [29] [30]  However, the deciency of close and ordered contacts of metal atoms and organics in the precursors led to electrocatalyst processing of larger particle sizes and uneven dispersion of the supported active sizes aer pyrolysis. Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) comprise a new class of porous and organic-inorganic hybrid materials with broad-based direct applications.  31, 32  Moreover, these materials possess abundant organic ligands and atomic periodic structure, which can offer unique benets for "atomic contact" between the metal ions and organic ligands. Such special features of MOFs make them possible precursors or templates for the fabrication of porous and nanostructured materials, such as porous carbon, metal oxides and metal oxide/carbon.  [33] [34] [35] [36]  To date, only Lou and colleagues' group have creatively developed a "MOFs-assisted strategy" to synthesize porous molybdenum carbide.  15  In this strategy, a Cubased MOF was used as the template, and the MoC x -Cu composite material was prepared by carburization reactions between the organic ligands and guest polyoxometalates (POMs) that pre-embed in the pores of the MOF host. The porous MoC x electrocatalyst was nally obtained aer removing metallic Cu particles via Fe 3+ etching, and exhibited good HER performance. MoC x species have usually been proven to oxidize on the surface even in ambient conditions;  12, 22, 37  the etching operation via oxidative Fe 3+ ions should be avoided if possible. Additionally, using Cu-MOF as a template and carburizing the organic ligand with the supported POMs in the pores is not benecial for real "atomic contact" between the Mo ions and organic ligand, which might not favor the formation of uniform MoC x nanostructures.  15  Hence, we predicted that ultrane and porous MoC x nanoparticles would likely be generated via the simple in situ carburizing of Mo-based MOF (Mo-MOF). The introduced carbon species derived from the sufficient organic ligands in MOF would conne and stabilize the MoC x nanocrystallites during the carburization process, and accelerate the charge transfer kinetics in the electrochemical process due to excellent conductivity. Herein, we developed a "MOFs-directed strategy" for synthesizing porous and uniformly nanostructured MoC electrocatalyst via in situ carburization of Mo-MOF under inert atmosphere, as shown in Scheme 1. The as-obtained catalyst is denoted as nanoMoC@GS, meaning highly dispersed and nanosized MoC encapsulated in graphitized carbon shell. In the ordered porous architecture of the Mo 3 (BTC) 2 precursor, the "atomic contact" between Mo ions and organic ligands enabled the formation of ultrane MoC nanocrystallites ($3 nm), which were encapsulated by the uffy and ultrathin graphitized carbon shell (ca. 1-3 layers). This conned geometry effectively inhibited the agglomeration and crystal growth of MoC nanocrystallites and, more importantly, resulted in improved conductivity and enriched porosity. The optimized nano-MoC@GS with a relatively low carburization temperature of 700 C exhibited a robust and superior HER performance in both acidic and basic media, making it among the best performing among reported noble-metal-free electrocatalysts. This high HER activity is ascribed to the cooperative/synergistic effects of the ultrane MoC nanoparticles, conductive and ultrathin graphitized carbon shells, and enriched porosity.

Experimental
Reagents Trimesic acid (H 3 BTC), molybdenum hexacarbonyl (Mo(CO) 6 ), ethanol, sulfuric acid (H 2 SO 4 ) and potassium hydroxide (KOH) were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. (AR grade, China). Dimethylformamide (DMF), platinum on graphitized carbon (20 wt%) and Naon® peruorinated ionexchange resin solution (5% w/w) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All chemicals were used without further purication.

Synthesis of porous and nanostructured molybdenum carbide
The Mo 3 (BTC) 2 (Mo-MOF) were prepared according to the reported method.  38  In a typical synthesis, 1.13 g of Mo(CO) 6 and 0.75 g of H 3 BTC were mixed with 50 mL of oxygen-free DMF. The resulting mixture was heated to reux under argon at 155 C under stirring for at least 5 days. Aer ltration and washing with oxygen-free DMF 3 times, the obtained orange-coloured precipitate was dried in vacuum at 135 C. The in situ carburization process of Mo 3 (BTC) 2 was conducted in a quartz tube under argon ow. Aer the precursor was packed in the tube, this tube was ushed with argon to expel air for 5 h at room temperature, the precursor was carburized at 700-900 C for 5 h in an argon gas ow at a heating rate of 5 C min À1 , and then the tube was cooled to room temperature. The as-prepared catalysts were stored in a vacuum desiccator before use. The catalysts were labeled as nanoMoC@GS(T), in which T represents the carburization temperature. For example, the nano-MoC@GS(700) sample was obtained via in situ carburization of Mo 3 (BTC) 2 at 700 C under argon ow.

Materials characterizations
The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the catalysts were recorded on a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer with Cu Ka radiation at 40 kV and 40 mA. The morphologies, structures and related element mapping information were obtained via eld emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Hitachi S-4800) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, FEI Tecnai G2 F20 S-Twin), respectively. N 2 -sorption isotherms were collected on a Quantachrome Instruments Autosorb AS-6B adsorption analyzer at À196 C. Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) specic surface areas were calculated from adsorption data, and Barrett-Joyner-Halenda (BJH) pore size distribution was derived from the desorption branch of the isotherms. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was collected on scanning Xray microprobe (Thermo Scientic, ESCALAB 250Xi) using Al Ka radiation and the C 1s peak at 284.8 eV as the internal standard. Raman spectra of powder samples were obtained on a laser confocal Raman microspectrometer (XploRA, Horiba Jobin Yvon, Ltd.) with a laser excitation wavelength of 532 nm.

Electrochemical measurements
All electrochemical properties were evaluated with a standard three-electrode system using a CHI660E potentiostat (CH Instruments, China). A saturated calomel electrode (SCE) and a graphite rod were used as the reference electrode and counter electrode, respectively. The potential was converted to the potential versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) according to E(RHE) ¼ E(SCE) + 0.2412 + 0.059pH. The working electrode was typically prepared via the following steps: (1) the as-prepared catalysts were dispersed in the solution containing 250 mL of ethanol, 750 mL of distilled water and 80 mL of 5 wt% Naon solution by ultrasonication for at least 1 h; (2) 4 mL of the ink was loaded onto the surface of a glassy carbon electrode (GCE, 3.0 mm in diameter); and (3) the modied GCE was dried at room temperature. Before the data were recorded, the working electrode was cycled at least 50 times at a scan rate of 50 mV s À1 . Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) was recorded in 0. 

Results and discussion
Characterization of porous and nanostructured nanoMoC@GS First, the Mo 3 (BTC) 2 precursor (Mo-MOF) was synthesized, and its XRD pattern is given in Fig.  S1 . † The porous and nanostructured nanoMoC@GS was then obtained by a simple in situ carburization of the as-prepared precursor under argon atmosphere. Fig.  1a  shows the XRD patterns of the materials carburized at 700-900 C. The sample carburized at 600 C was not presented in this work, because this sample was so active that it would have self-ignited during its collection. Weaker and broader diffraction peaks indicated formation of nanocrystallites with very small size, which were ascribed to hexagonal h-MoC phase. Additionally, the diffraction peaks became stronger and sharper as carburization temperature increased, indicating greater crystallization and/or particle size of MoC. Interestingly, XRD patterns of the nanoMoC@GS gave results different from our previous researches, in which typically b-Mo 2 C was produced by pyrolyzing the MoO x /amine hybrid precursor at similar temperatures.  13, 25  Mo et al. investigated the effect of carburization protocols on MoC x synthesis using a methanothermal temperature programmed reaction, and concluded that MoC formation was favored when a higher concentration of hydrocarbon or a long-chain hydrocarbon was used.  39  In this in situ carburization process, the organic ligands (BTC 3À ) of the MOF precursor played two different roles as they (1) removed the oxygen atom in the mixtures and (2) acted as a carbon source to form MoC x . Hence, the relatively higher C/ Mo atomic ratio (6 : 1) and lower oxygen atom content in the MOF precursor contributed to MoC formation. Raman spectra were adopted to investigate the carbon state. The intensity ratio of the D to G band (I D /I G ) was normally used to evaluate the defect content of graphite/ene structures.  40  In Fig.  1b , the G bands located at ca. 1600 cm À1 suggested formation of graphitized carbon in these materials, and similar I D /I G , 1.01 for nanoMoC@GS(700), 1.06 for nanoMoC@GS(800) and 1.02 for nanoMoC@GS(900), indicated that the carburization temperature in our experimental conditions had a slight inuence on defects of the obtained graphite structure. The morphology and detailed structure of the as-prepared nanoMoC@GS materials were investigated by SEM and TEM. Typically, nanoMoC@GS(700) (Fig.  2a ) presented a morphology of stacked nanospheres with a smooth surface, suggesting that the MoC nanocrystallites (Fig.  2b ) were surface covered by carbon species. The corresponding TEM images (Fig.  2c  and d ) also conrmed formation of the uffy and ultrathin graphitized carbon shell (1-3 layers) in the sample, which encapsulated uniform and ultrane nanocrystallites, as indicated by white arrows. This uffy graphitized carbon shell and conned geometry have three main advantages: (1) enhancement of the interface contact of MoC nanoparticles with the lamellar graphitized carbon shell, which could suppress the dissolution or agglomeration of MoC nanoparticles, (2) improvement of the electrocatalyst conductivity, allowing rapid charge transfer kinetics during the electrochemical process, and (3) presentation of a very high surface area that not only exposes abundant special catalytic sites but also facilitates electrolyte access and diffusion of produced hydrogen. Notably, the size of asprepared MoC nanocrystallites ($3 nm, Fig.  2b  inset) via this "MOFs-directed strategy" was smaller and more even than that obtained via the "MOFs-assisted strategy" ($5 nm in size with some larger particles appearing at the corners  15  ) and our previous "organic-inorganic hybrid-conversion strategy" (10-15 nm in size).  13  This ultrane nanostructure was promoted by "atomic contact" between Mo ions and organic ligands in the ordered porous architecture of the Mo-MOF precursor that effectively prevented the coalescence and crystal growth of MoC nanocrystallites during carburization. The lattice fringes of 0.21 and 0.24 nm in high-resolution TEM (HRTEM, Fig.  2d ) corresponded to the (103) and (006) planes of h-MoC, respectively. Aer increasing the carburization temperature, the agglomeration of MoC nanoparticles could be detected, resulting in larger particle size and broader distribution of MoC particles (Fig.  S2 † ). Meanwhile, scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM, Fig.  3a ) and corresponding elemental mapping (Fig.  3b  and c ) showed that the Mo and C atoms were homogeneously distributed over the entire material, suggesting that MoC nanocrystals were evenly integrated within the graphitized carbon shell. The element composition of nanoMoC@GS(700) was studied via energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS, Fig.  3d ). Contents of the graphitized carbon and Mo in the nano-MoC@GS were calculated and measured by TGA and ICP-AES, respectively, and the results are given in Fig.  S3  and Table  S1 . † It could be seen that the content of graphitized carbon decreased with increasing carburization temperature while that of MoC increased synchronously, which might result from removal of organic fragments in the graphite shell at higher treatment temperatures. Furthermore, these three samples were analysed by XPS (Fig.  S4 † ). The peak tting of Mo 3d proles suggested that there had been four states (+2, +3, +4 and +6) for Mo on the surface. Mo 4+ and Mo 6+ species resulted from inactive MoO 2 and MoO 3 , respectively, which are commonly observed as carbides are exposed to air.  12, 22, 37  We focused on the Mo 2+ and Mo 3+ species peaking in 228.1-228.9 eV (Mo 3d 5/2 ) and 231.3-232.0 eV (Mo 3d 3/2 ), because they were the main species in MoC and the active centres for electrocatalytic HER.  37  The content of (Mo 3+ + Mo 2+ ) and Mo 3+ /Mo 2+ mole ratios (n 3+/2+ ) were applied to identify the properties of active sites for HER (Table  S1  †). It could be seen that the values above did not show obvious variation between the samples carburized at different temperatures with the same precursor, indicating similar composition and electronic environment of active sites in these samples. In addition, C 1s XPS proles of the as-obtained nanoMoC@GS materials showed similar position and shape of peaks (Fig.  S4b † ). The peaks of C 1s narrowed with the increase in carburization temperature, which could probably be ascribed to removal of organic fragments in the graphite shell at higher treatment temperatures. BET surface area and BJH pore size distribution were measured by N 2 -sorption isothermal analysis. As shown in Fig.  4a , the obtained nanoMoC@GS materials primarily inherited the enriched porosity of the Mo-MOF precursor aer in situ carburization. A very high BET surface area (S BET ¼ 187 m 2 g À1 ) was achieved on the nanoMoC@GS(700) sample, which decreased to 131 and 115 m 2 g À1 as the carburization temperature increased to 800 and 900 C, respectively. Meanwhile, a typical bimodal porosity was observed in the materials (Fig.  4b ). The nanopores of 3-4 nm probably resulted from the uffy graphitized carbon shell and/or aggregation of MoC nanocrystallites inside the materials (Fig.  2c  and d ), and the abundant meso/macropores distributed in the range of 20-300  nm were ascribed to the secondary piled pore of nanoMoC@GS particles (Fig.  2a ), which did not appear in our previous Mo 2 C nanowires obtained by pyrolyzing the MoO x /amine hybrid precursor.  13  Herein, it was expected that high surface area and special meso/macropore structures would decrease the diffusion resistance and promote the exposure of active sites during the electrochemical process, resulting in improved HER performance in these materials.

HER catalytic activities of nanoMoC@GS catalysts
The as-prepared nanoMoC@GS materials were studied as electrocatalysts for HER in 0.5 M H 2 SO 4 , and the HER activity of Pt/C (20 wt%) was also evaluated under the same conditions. The HER activity of nanoMoC@GS materials was rst investigated with the mass loading of 0.76 mg cm À2 , which is similar to that of the previously reported MoC x nano-octahedrons prepared via carburizing the Cu-MOF template with preembedded polyoxometalate guests.  15  Fig.  5a  shows the HER activity of nanoMoC@GS prepared at three different carburization temperatures. NanoMoC@GS(700) exhibited optimal HER performance in acidic media, while those prepared at higher carburization temperatures showed slightly inferior performance. In particular, nanoMoC@GS(700) achieved current densities of 1 and 10 mA cm À2 with lowest overpotentials of 84 (h 1 ) and 132 mV (h 10 ), respectively. Beyond this, the cathodic current density increased rapidly at more negative potentials with a very high current density (j 200 ) of 100 mA cm À2 at an overpotential of 200 mV. Such excellent performances were even better than results reported by Lou and colleagues' work on MoC x nano-octahedrons produced by the "MOFsassisted strategy" from polyoxometalate-embedded Cu-MOF,  15  or our previous report on Mo 2 C nanowires converted from Mo 3 O 10 (C 6 H 8 N)$2H 2 O hybrid precursor.  13  For example, the j 200 value on our catalyst was about twice those of Lou and colleagues and our previous work (j 200 ¼ $40 and 60 mA cm À2 , respectively). Moreover, the smallest Tafel slope (46 mV dec À1 ) was also obtained for nanoMoC@GS(700), suggesting that the reaction proceeds through the Volmer-Heyrovsky mechanism in which the electrochemical desorption step was rate limiting.  3, 13  By extrapolating the Tafel plot, the exchange current density (j 0 ) of nanoMoC@GS(700) was calculated as 13.5 Â 10 À3 mA cm À2 , which was also much higher than that of the other two samples derived from higher temperatures (Table  S2  †), reecting the lower reaction resistance in this former sample. The electrochemical surface area (ECSA) is directly related to the HER activity, but its accurate measurement for MoC x is difficult due to its unclear capacitive behavior.  21, 22  Hence, the electrochemical double-layer capacitances (C dl ) measured by the CV method (Fig.  S5 † ) were widely applied to evaluate relative ECSA of the catalysts. As expected, given its highest HER activity, nanoMoC@GS(700) did show the largest C dl value of 66.6 mF cm À2 (Fig.  5c ), implying that this sample had a much higher ECSA than the samples prepared at higher carburization temperatures. Meanwhile, the surface area (S BET ) of the samples followed the same decreasing order of the C dl value with the increase in carburization temperature, that is, nano-MoC@GS(700) (187 m 2 g À1 ) > nanoMoC@GS(800) (131 m 2 g À1 ) > nanoMoC@GS(900) (115 m 2 g À1 ). It has been suggested that the S BET was a crucial parameter for HER by enabling the rapid diffusion of species during the reactions.  13, 15, 41  In order to evaluate the contribution of S BET to ESCA or HER activity, the C dl /S BET ratios were calculated: 0.37 for nanoMoC@GS(700), 0.32 for nanoMoC@GS(800), and 0.14 for nanoMoC@GS(900). Notably, this ratio decreased in turn rather than remaining unchanged in the samples with increasing carburization temperature, indicating that S BET was not the sole cause affecting ECSA or HER activity. The XPS results have revealed that a similar composition and electronic environment of active sites existed in three samples. Therefore, this variation of C dl / S BET ratio was ascribed to other active-site structural disparity besides porosity and surface area. TEM images showed that increasing carburization temperature resulted in agglomeration of MoC nanoparticles, and the smallest and most uniform MoC nanocrystallites were obtained in nanoMoC@GS(700). Such special features of this catalyst with ultrane MoC nanostructure supported on an exposed structure ensured proliferating active sites on its surface, thus contributing to the outstanding HER activity. Thus far, we lack a good technique for directly quantifying the amount of exposed h-MoC active sites and ECSA, and it is difficult to obtain the accurate turnover frequency (TOF) of the electrocatalysts. Alternatively, the ratios of j 200 to C dl of the three samples were adopted to estimate the relative TOFs of the various nanoMoC@GS due to the proportional relationship of C dl value to ECSA. The values were 1.5 for nanoMoC@GS(700), 1.1 for nanoMoC@GS(800), and 0.8 for nanoMoC@GS(900). This result indicated declining intrinsic activity of the active sites in the sample carburized at higher temperature, which was quite consistent with the variety of C dl / S BET ratios. It also conrmed the existence of cooperative/ synergistic effects of ultrane MoC and the catalyst's open structure. The experiment for long-term stability of nano-MoC@GS(700) (Fig.  5d ) showed only a little deterioration of cathodic currents aer 3000 cycles. Meanwhile, the result of chronoamperometry (CA) for nanoMoC@GS(700) showed that the catalytic currents remained at around 15 mA cm À2 at 150 mV over 10 h, demonstrating the high stability under experimental conditions employed for this HER process. The HRTEM images of nanoMoC@GS(700) aer electrochemical stability testing are provided in Fig.  S6 . † NanoMoC@GS(700) structure and particle size distribution of the MoC nanoparticles showed only slight changes, conrming the superior stability of this electrocatalyst, which resulted from the conned geometry (ultrane MoC nanoparticles encapsulated by graphitized carbon shells) in this material. We then used EIS to provide further insight into electrode kinetics of the obtained materials. As shown in Fig.  6a , nano-MoC@GS(700) presented a much lower charge-transfer resistance (R ct ) value (14.5 U) than nanoMoC@GS(800) (28.6 U) and nanoMoC@GS(900) (69.5 U), indicating a faster electron transfer rate in the HER process. This lower R ct should be related to the conned geometry in nanoMoC@GS materials, which would enhance the close interface contract of MoC nanoparticles with the ultrathin graphitized carbon shell and allow rapid charge transfer kinetics during the electrochemical process by improving the conductivity of electrocatalysts. The lowest R ct value for nanoMoC@GS(700) might result from its relatively large quantity of graphitized carbon (Table  S1  †). EIS for nanoMoC@GS(700) at various HER overpotentials from 75 to 200 mV in 0.5 M H 2 SO 4 is provided in Fig.  S7 . † The corresponding Nyquist and Bode plots of the EIS response of nanoMoC@GS(700) are given in Fig.  6b , and two peaks could be detected in the curves. The rst one with potential-dependent properties at low frequencies could be attributed to kinetics of the HER process; while another at high frequencies with the same intensity suggested that this electrocatalyst processed an abundant porosity,  13  which was in agreement with N 2 -sorption experimental results. It has been widely demonstrated that different electrocatalysts have varying optimal mass loadings for HER.  15, 16, 20  The optimal mass loading of nanoMoC@GS(700) was also investigated. Results (Fig.  7a ) showed that the optimal mass loading was 1.04 mg cm À2 . The lower overpotentials of 77 for h 1 and 124 mV for h 10 could be achieved at this point. The j 200 at the higher overpotential of 200 mV was up to 146 mA cm À2 with a smaller Tafel slope of 43 mV dec À1 (Fig.  S8 † ) and a larger j 0 of 15.1 Â 10 À3 mA cm À2 . Fig.  7b  depicts relationships among mass loadings with current density at overpotentials of 150 and 200 mV, and two individual volcano curves could be observed. Notably, in the range from 0.16 to 1.04 mg cm À2 , current density linearly increased along with mass loading, indicating that the material's active sites would not overlap under such a large mass loading and that the HER activity was dominated by the active site number. This result was likely attributable to not only enriched meso/macropores structures but also nanostructure and graphitized carbon shells, which would completely expose active sites with excellent conductivity and very fast diffusion of electrolytes and H 2 under such a high mass loading on the electrode surface. Additionally, to the best of our knowledge, the HER activity of nanoMoC@GS(700) characterized by low h 10 (124 mV), high j 200 (146 mA cm À2 ) and striking kinetic metrics (b ¼ 43 mV dec À1 ), which performed among the best of current noble metal-free electrocatalysts in acidic media (Table  S3  †). In the case of metal carbides, the h 10 of 124 mV on nano-MoC@GS(700) was lower than that of reported Mo 2 C nanowires (130 mV),  13  MoC x nano-octahedrons (142 mV),  15  MoC-Mo 2 C heteronanowires (126 mV),  26  Mo 2 C nanotubes (172 mV),  42  and even supported MoC x (Mo 2 C/N-doped CNT: 147 mV; Mo 2 C/ RGO: 150 mV; Mo 2 C/CNT: 152 mV). Although better activity has been achieved on MoC x catalysts,  3, 17, 19, 21  they usually require secondary component modications, such as doping an element (N, P, etc.) and/or conductive supports (RGO, CNT, etc.) e.g., N-doping Mo 2 C@carbon (h 10 ¼ 78 mV)  22  and Mo 2 C-Mo 2 N-RGO (h 10 ¼ 109 mV).  14  The high HER performance of Nano-MoC@GS(700) without secondary modications suggested this  This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016 catalyst's superiority and possibilities for further improvement of its HER activity. In order to expand the application range of this material, HER activity of the nanoMoC@GS(700) sample was also evaluated in basic media with the comparable mass loading of 0.76 mg cm À2 ; results are depicted in Fig.  8 . The nanoMoC@GS(700) also exhibited super HER activity in basic media with an ultrasmall h 1 (42 mV) and h 10 (77 mV), respectively. Meanwhile, it exhibited large C dl values of 64.9 mF cm À2 (Fig.  8c  and S9 †) and a small R ct of 34.8 (Fig.  S10 † ) at 125 mV, suggesting that this electrocatalyst also possessed a large ECSA and faster electron transfer rates in basic media. Notably, Pt/C showed an overwhelming advantage in acidic media, while the HER activity of nanoMoC@GS(700) even exceeded that of Pt/C at the high overpotential (>125 mV) in basic media. This interesting result was ascribed to different reaction pathways for the two catalysts, which were reected by the different Tafel slope (77 mV dec À1 for Pt/C and 50 mV dec À1 for nanoMoC@GS) in Fig.  8b .  15  Additionally, the Nyquist and Bode plots of the EIS response for nanoMoC@GS(700) were depicted in Fig.  8d , and the peak at high frequencies also demonstrated the enriched porosity of this catalyst. Such prominent HER activity of nano-MoC@GS(700) in basic media was almost the best among the current noble metal-free HER electrocatalysts (Table  S5  †). Overall these results clearly indicated that nanoMoC@GS(700) is a highly versatile, efficient HER electrocatalyst over a wide pH range.

Conclusion
In summary, we have developed a "MOFs-directed strategy" to synthesize porous nanoMoC@GS with ultrane MoC nanoparticles conned in graphitized carbon shell for efficient HER. The nanoMoC@GS was prepared by simple in situ carburizing Mo-MOF under an inert atmosphere. This ultrane nanostructure was ascribed to the real "atomic contact" between the Mo ions and organic ligands in the ordered porous architecture of the MOF precursor. The obtained electrocatalyst showed the following: (1) the MoC nanocrystallites ($3 nm in size) were embedded in conductively ultrathin graphitized carbon shells (ca. 1-3 layers), which would prevent excess growth and coalescence during the carburization and usage process; and (2) enhanced conductivity and enriched porosity were achieved by this conned geometry and uffy graphitized carbon shells. Beneting from the cooperative/synergistic effects of ultrane MoC nanostructure, ultrathin graphitized carbon shells and enriched porosity, the nanoMoC@GS material exhibited remarkable electrocatalytic activity for HER in both acidic and basic media with good stability, performing among the best of the current noble-metal-free electrocatalysts. The h 10 of 124 and 77 mV, Tafel slope of 43 and 50 mV dec À1 , and j 0 of 0.015 and 0.212 mA cm À2 was observed on the optimized nano-MoC@GS(700) sample in 0.5 M H 2 SO 4 and 1.0 M KOH, respectively. In addition, this strategy not only enriched the applications of MOFs to synthesize various functional materials, but also opened up new opportunities to develop nanocatalysts in the energy chemistry eld.