Efficient synthesis of topologically chiral links with controlled handedness is challenging, despite several molecular prime links that have been prepared. Here, we described the two-step highly stereoselective synthesis of a Star of David [2]  catenane ( 6 
2  1 ). Use of CHIRAGENs containing chiral centers closed to coordination sites allows the transfer of the point chirality of the ligands to the topological chirality of the resulting link. This study opens the way to explore the development and potential of topological stereochemistry in chemistry and beyond. The catenand shows weaker CD response than that of the ligand and macrocycle

INTRODUCTION
Links (generally termed ''catenanes'' in molecular systems)  1  are a collection of structures formed by mechanically interlocked closed loops (macrocycles). Complex molecular links are found in DNA  2, 3  and proteins.  4, 5  The unique geometry and dynamics of links can be exploited in functional materials  6, 7  and artificial molecular machinery.  8  Molecular links are either conditionally topologically chiral  9  or unconditionally topologically chiral.  10  Despite several synthetic strategies to molecular prime links with different topologies have been discovered,  [11] [12] [13] [14] [15]  the stereoselective synthesis of topologically chiral links with controlled handedness is mainly limited to the simplest Hopf link  9, [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29]  (2 2 1 ) (Figure  1A ) and metallalinks.  [30] [31] [32]  The early remarkable example of enantioselective preparation of a topologically chiral Solomon link ( 4  2  1 , doubly interlocked [2]catenane) was disclosed by Sanders and co-workers.  33  The organic link was obtained as a single topological stereoisomer from a dynamic combinatorial library containing chiral building blocks. Multimetal-ion circular helicates have been proved to be effective scaffolds for assembly of a series of nanotopologies  34, 35  by regulating the shape, size, and strand connectivity.  [36] [37] [38] [39]  Since all metal centers feature same stereochemistry within the helicate (all L or D), it is obvious that both the helical chirality of the intermediate helicate and the topologically chirality of resulted topology are directly determined by the absolute configuration of the metal centers. A family of pyridine and bipyridine ligands with appended stereogenic centers developed by von Zelewsky and coworkers  40  has been termed chirality generators (CHIRAGENs) because these stereogenic centers can induce the chirality at metal coordination site in a highly stereoselective manner.  41, 42  Application of chirality transfer in metal-template synthesis

THE BIGGER PICTURE
A plethora of strategies have been developed for the construction of molecular links since 1960; however, the highly stereoselective synthesis of inherently chiral links is still challenging. A two-step stereoselective preparation of a topologically chiral 6  2  1 link, in the shape of a Star of David, is presented. Six equivalent of metal-ion templates is employed to drive self-assembly with six chiral building blocks into a helicate scaffold; a suitable bridge is designed between two chelating sites to direct the size of this hexamer; the length and conformational freedom of extended aliphatic olefin chains are modeled to ensure successful metathesis toward the desired connectivity; and the chiral moiety adjacent to the coordination units is placed to secure topological chirality. Such tactics are practically important in molecular nanotopology and create opportunities not only to explore the effects of chemical constitution on topological and tangled materials but also to elucidate the consequences of topological chirality in chemistry and beyond. Chem 9, 859-868, April 13, 2023 ª 2022 Elsevier Inc. 859 enables to not only render amphicheiral (topologically achiral in 3D) Borromean rings chiral  43  but also prepare topological chiral molecular knots of single handedness.  [44] [45] [46] [47]  Accordingly, if one link is unconditionally topologically chiral, this tactic should also proceed completely stereoselectivity with only one of the two different topological enantiomers being obtained. An iconic topology, Star of David [2]catenane (6  2  1 link in Alexander-Briggs notation  48  ) containing two triply interlocked macrocycles is unconditionally topologically chiral (Figure  1A ). Leigh and co-workers reported the elegant synthesis by covalent capture of Lehn-type hexameric circular helicate,  49  and the inherently chiral links are formed as racemate by using the achiral tris-bipyridine ligand strand.  50  Although the enantioselective synthesis was achieved later by using a heterometallic helicate, the introduction of unremovable iridium(III) template afforded a metallic link in which the ring dynamic was sacrificed.  51  Different from Lehn-type helicates  49  which are hard to be functionalized, the introduction of well-developed CHIRAGENs  41, 42  may provide a general and efficient method in the construction of high-order knots and links with controlled chirality. The early example by von Zelewsky and co-workers presented a highly stereoselective self-assembly of a hexameric circular helicate by using pinene-bipyridine ligand (Figure  1B ). Both hexamer and tetramer were detected in solution using silver(I) template,  52, 53  whereas only hexamer was formed with copper(I) metal ions.  54  We envisage that this helicate provides an orderly hexagonal entanglement arrangement required for the formation of a Star of David catenane, the suitable alteration of this CHIRAGEN ligand would deliver the construction of the only L-enantiomer of a 6  2  1 link.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Highly stereoselective self-assembly of hexameric circular helicate The ligand frame consists of two pinene-2,2 0 -bipyridine units connected through a xylene bridge. Molecular modeling suggested that a five-atom chain attached to the 4-position of the pinene-bipyridine moiety, i.e., 1, should provide the suitable orientation and positioning to promote joining of the ligand strands with desired connectivity (Figure  1B ). The chain ends with an alkene so that the ligands can be fused through ring-closing olefin metathesis (RCM), and the metal templates can be subsequently removed to leave a wholly organic catenand. Chiral ligand 1 was synthesized in six steps from commercially available materials (supplemental information section ''synthesis of ligand 1''). Brief stirring of 1 with an equimolar amount of AgPF 6 in acetonitrile/chloroform (5:1) at room temperature for 30 min followed by the removal of solvent resulted in a white solid (Figure  2 , step i). The 1 H NMR spectrum (Figure  3B ) of the product shows all the ligands to be in equivalent environments. Together with the significant upfield displacement of H a , H b (1.42 ppm) and H 10 (0.35 ppm), this indicated the formation of a highly symmetric circular helicate structure. It is worth to mention that neither broadening at 298 K nor splitting at 233 K of H a and H b signals was observed (Figure  S1 ) comparing with the previous report,  52  the results suggest the existence of only one type of helicate after introducing the electron-donating group within 1, rather than two (tetrameric and hexameric circular helicates) rapidly exchanged species. The size of the helicate was further determined by electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry (ESI-MS). Despite the labile nature of silver(I) complexes, weak intensity of m/z peaks confirmed it to be the hexamer L-[Ag 6 1 6 ](PF 6 ) 6 (Figure  S2 ).  53  Replacement of AgPF 6 with Cu(MeCN) 4 PF 6 afforded a reddish solid under same condition (Figure  2 , step ii), which was characterized as L-[Cu 6 1 6 ](PF 6 ) 6 by ESI-MS (Figure  S4 ) and  1  H NMR (Figure  3C ). There is virtually no circular dichroism (CD) signal of ligand 1 in the p-p* (240-320 nm) region of the spectra, obvious CD activity, however, arising from exciton coupling of both helicates (L-[Ag 6 1 6 ](PF 6 ) 6 , Dε 245 nm = +2.0 3 10 6 M À1 cm À1 and L-[Cu 6 1 6 ](PF 6 ) 6 , Dε 245 nm = +0.7 3 10 6 M À1 cm À1 ) could be observed (Figure  S18 ). By comparing with the previous results, we reasoned that the point chirality of the ligand has been effectively transferred into the coordinating complex, and it resulted in an enantiomeric circular helicate with all metal centers featuring L-configuration.  [52] [53] [54] [55]  The obtained metallic helicates containing regular hexagonal entanglements should be ideal building blocks for the construction of molecular woven materials  [56] [57] [58]  with regular Kagome pattern  59  by having sufficient control of intermolecular connections.

Formation of Star of David [2]catenate via covalent capture
Ring closure of L-[Ag 6 1 6 ](PF 6 ) 6 in the presence of Hoveyda-Grubbs 2 nd catalyst  60  was proven to be unsuccessful under several conditions, probably due to the sensitivity of silver complex toward chloride-substituted ruthenium catalyst. In contrast, subjecting L-[Cu 6 1 6 ](PF 6 ) 6 to RCM condition, followed by anion exchange with methanolic KPF 6 (Figure  2 , steps iii and iv) produced the metallated Star of David [2]catenate L-[Cu 6 2](PF 6 ) 6 (a catenane-metal complex is termed a ''catenate'' and the interlocked metal-free ligand is a catenand, 61 a simulated model of resulted copper(I)- [2]catenate was shown in Figures  2  and S19 ). ESI-MS indicated characteristic distributions of m/z peaks on account of the loss of corresponding PF 6 À after losing six ethene molecules of the L-[Cu 6 2](PF 6 ) 6 (Figures  S6-S8 ). The ''catenand effect  62  '' improved the stability of resulted copper(I) link and gave significantly increased MS peak intensity (Figure  S5 ). The 1 H NMR spectrum (Figure  3D ) also confirmed the absence of terminal alkene protons and the presence of a broad signal at 5.63 ppm for the internal alkene H e protons. Small amount of polymeric by-product (around 10%-15% according to 1 H NMR integration) was formed and could not be removed from the metallic link through conventional purification process (e.g., re-crystallization, anion exchange, and solvent wash), which is probably due to the decomposition, followed by polymerization of the labile copper(I) helicate under RCM condition. The topological writhe (w, also called Tait number  63  ) of a link (knots could be considered special cases of links with one component) is the sum of all signs of its crossing points in a standard projection (projection of the link without nugatory crossing).  64  The obtained number depends only on the link type and is thus a topological invariant of a link. Since only left-handed crossings were generated through chiral transformation, the topological writhe of the resulted [2]catenate was scored as À6 (Figure  2 ). The value is directly determined by the configuration of the asymmetric carbon centers within ligand strand 1. Despite crucial applications of writhe in knot theory and DNA,  [65] [66] [67] [68]  the implications of writhe on small-molecule systems are yet to be realized.  38  The stereoselective synthesis of small molecular topologies with specific topological writhe may deliver a potential strategy to elucidate the mechanisms of such fundamental process in nature.

Wholly organic Star of David [2]catenand
The [2]catenate was demetallated by treatment of an acetonitrile solution of L-[Cu 6 2](PF 6 ) 6 with aqueous tetrasodium ethylenediaminetetraacetate (Na 4 EDTA) (Figure  2 , step v). The color of the solution changed from reddish brown to beige after 30 min, implying the successful removal of copper(I) templates. Two products were isolated by size exclusion chromatography (SEC). The major product (50%) was characterized as the organic Star of David [2]catenand L-2 (Figures  4A  and S9 ), whereas the minor product (20%), which has a molecular mass equal to half that of L-2 (Figure  S12 ), was assigned to be the unlinked macrocycle 3. The formation of macrocycle could be attributed to either the decomposition of labile copper(I) helicate during ring closure or the opening of L-2 triggered by the trace amount of ruthenium species from the ring-closure reaction.  50  The 1 H NMR spectra of L-2 and 3 are very similar (Figures  3E  and 3F ), suggesting that the triply entwined macrocycles within the link feature similar chemical environment as the unlinked macrocycle in solution. This could be attributed to the relatively loose conformation and the fast reptation  69  of ring components within the [2]catenand. Variable-temperature 1 H NMR spectra of L-2 shows little change over the temperature range (243-323 K) which further supports our hypothesis (Figure  S33 ). The diffusion-ordered spectroscopy NMR (DOSY) showed that L-2 (D = 1.2 3 10 À10 m 2 s À1 ) and 3 (D = 6.0 3 10 À10 m 2 s À1 ) process different diffusion coefficient (Figures  S32  and S37 ). The interlocked architecture of the [2] ) were detected, corresponding to a structure with half mass of the [2]catanand (Figure  4B ). The results are consistent with the typical fragmentation process of a [2]catenand  70  which breaks one macrocycle and causes the dethreading to form a single ring that remains charged. The organic Star of David [2]catenand L-2 is remetallated by treatment with Cu(MeCN) 4 PF 6 in a dichloromethane/acetonitrile (1:1) mixture at 60 C for 24 h, and the regeneration of the Star of David [2]catenate can be clearly confirmed by both low-resolution (LR)-and high-resolution (HR)-ESI (Figures  S14-S16 ). Although the 1 H NMR spectrum of the remetallated link is broader than that of the metallated link obtained from ring closure, most of proton signals are in similar chemical shifts (Figure  S13 ). Considering that there are 12 chelating vacancies in the organic link, we assume that the ''wrong'' combinations between bipyridine units and copper(I) ions are hard to be corrected due to the slow coordination dynamics. Nevertheless, the reformation of the catenate is a further proof of the formation of the Star of David catenane topology. The synthetic availability allows us to further explore the consequences in properties among the uncoordinated ligand strand, unlinked macrocycle and [2]catenand. To directly probe the differences among three compounds, the concentration of ligand and macrocycle are adjusted (c 1 = 6 3 c L-2 , c 3 = 2 3 c L-2 ) by considering the number of chromophores and stereogenic carbon centers in each molecule. The ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra of ligand 1, macrocycle 3, and link L-2 have similar profiles with absorption band at l = 230 (pyridyl n-p*), 257, and 291 nm (bipyridine p-p*) in the expected region for bipyridine units (Figure  5 ). The similar absorbance intensities indicated the chromophores were in similar environment in different topologies, which again supports the results obtained from 1 H NMR. The triply entwined 6 2 1 link is unconditionally topologically chiral by virtue of its topology. CD spectra of three compounds all displayed negative Cotton effect. The CD response of macrocycle is slightly lower than that of the ligand, but other than this, the spectra of 1 and 3 are similar, both a reflection of the influence of the chiral centers on the adjacent chromophores. The induced CD signal of the catenand L-2, The concentration of ligand and macrocycle were adjusted on account of the number of chromophores and stereogenic carbon centers in each molecule, so that the absorbance intensity and CD response among three compounds can be directly compared. The UV-vis spectra were presented in dash line, and the CD spectra presented in sloid line. L-2 showed much weaker chiral expression than that of ligand and macrocycle in the range of 220-240 nm. however, is noticeably weaker ($0.53) than that of the ligand and macrocycle in the range 220-240 nm (Figure  5 ). It should be noted that in the absence of the metal-ion templates, the organic [2]catenand would adapt multiple interconverted dissymmetric and asymmetric conformations through backbone reptation instead of a well-defined D 6 -helical symmetry, which average out to give the CD responses.  71  

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Resource availability Lead contact Liang Zhang, zhangliang@chem.ecnu.edu.cn.

Materials availability
This study did not generate new reagents.