While methanol (MeOH) synthesis via CO 2 hydrogenation might become practically relevant in the future thanks to advances in catalyst design, 
[1]  this basic chemical is currently industrially produced from syngas (CO + 2H 2 QCH 3 OH) over aC u-ZnO-Al 2 O 3 catalyst at elevated pressures (5.0-10.0 MPa) and temperatures (473-573 K).  [2]  Small amounts of CO 2 (ca. 3vol. %) are added to the syngas leading to a3-6 times enhancement of the MeOH formation rate.  [3]  It is widely accepted that the so-called "CO 2 promotion" is related to the transformation of CO into CO 2 via the water-gas shift (WGS) reaction (CO + H 2 OQCO 2 + H 2 )a nd its subsequent hydrogenation to MeOH (CO 2 + 3H 2 QCH 3 OH + H 2 O).  [4]  Thel atter is much faster than the hydrogenation of CO but strongly limited by thermodynamics and product inhibition by H 2 Oa th igh CO 2 concentrations resulting in the typical volcano plot shown in Figure  1 (described later). Klier et al.  [3a]  speculated that an optimal oxidation state of Cu, i.e., partially oxidized, correlates with the top of the curve.This hypothesis has never been confirmed for commercial catalysts under reaction conditions and neglects the essential role of ZnO uncovered in the CO 2 promotion.  [3b]  Multiple studies have revealed that zinc oxide strongly influences the CO 2 hydrogenation, acting as as tructural and electronic promoter for Cu.  [5]  As indicated recently,t his reaction appears to be favored over the reverse water-gas shift (RWGS) on ac omposite obtained by mechanical mixing of large particles of Cu and Al 2 O 3 with ZnO in aplate-like shape with respect to the case of am ixture containing rod-like ZnO crystallites,  [5d]  based on the stronger electronic interactions between ZnO and Cu in the former catalyst. However,the relevance of the structure-function relationships derived in these works is limited by the use of model materials and/or ex situ characterization. Indeed, it has conclusively been demonstrated that only in situ and operando methods enable the detection of dynamic changes in the structure of heterogeneous catalysts at work which may be linked to the reaction mechanism.  [6]  As af irst step in this direction, operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), synchrotron X-ray powder diffraction (SXRPD), and in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) at (sub)ambient pressure have been applied over Cu supported on ZnO,e videncing that copper forms disc-like particles wetted by Zn atoms under strongly reducing gas mixtures (CO/H 2 )a nd spherical particles in the presence of H 2 Oa nd/or CO 2 .  [7]  Similar results were also obtained under WGS conditions while the effect of the ZnO morphology has not been assessed even though interactions between the Cu and ZnO phases were verified.  [8]  In addition, key intermediates of CO 2 hydrogenation could be detected on an industrial Cu-ZnO-Al 2 O 3 catalyst using in situ diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) at 3.0 MPa and 373-473 K.  [9]  Still, these analyses have not assessed structural and mechanistic aspects under industrially relevant pressures and temperatures to explain the CO 2 promotion for amulticomponent commercial catalyst. Consequently,w ei nvestigated for the first time ac ommercial Cu-ZnO-Al 2 O 3 material by operando SXRPD during hydrogenation of CO,C O 2 ,a nd CO/CO 2 to MeOH at 543 K and 5.0 MPa, using the composition leading to the maximal MeOH formation rate for the mixed syngas feed, to correlate changes of the particle morphology with the reaction rates. We derived mass distributions of the Cu and ZnO particles on the basis of their dimensions applying as ize-and shape-sensitive Debye function analysis (DFA).  [10]  This investigation uncovered morphological alterations occurring under CO/H 2 and CO 2 /H 2 ,w hich differ from previous results gathered under conditions far from the industrial process.T he distinct MeOH yields observed in the CO 2 -promoted regime over the catalyst pretreated in CO/H 2 or CO 2 /H 2 were correlated with its WGS activity evidenced by operando modulated-excitation DRIFTS (ME-DRIFTS). Under CO/CO 2 /H 2 ,s pecific morphologies of Cu and ZnO were detected that facilitate the WGS reaction, thus identifying the structural reasons for the CO 2 promotion. TheC u-ZnO-Al 2 O 3 catalyst herein studied was supplied in pelletized form. Thebasic characterization of this material is summarized in Tables  S1  and S2  in the Supporting Information. Thef resh sample features am olar bulk ratio of Cu:Zn:Al = 6.0:2.6:1.3 (Cu:Zn:Al = 50.6:22.5:4.6 wt. %, Figure  S1 ), am olar surface composition of Cu:Zn:Al:Mg:Ca = 6.0:5.1:1.3:1.1:0.3 (Figure  S2 ), aB runauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) surface area of 118 m foot_1  g cat À1 (Figure  S3 ), ac opper surface area of 24.0 m 2 g cat À1 ,c rystalline Cu and ZnO particles exhibiting an average size of 4.9 and 6.4 nm, respectively,a nd an amorphous Al 2 O 3 phase.S canning electron microscopy-energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDXS) uncovered copper-, zinc-, aluminum-, and carbon-rich regions,i ndicating the heterogeneous composition of the material at the mms cale (Figure  S4 ). TheM eOH space-time yield measured over this catalyst in af ixed-bed reactor set-up described elsewhere  [4d]  exhibits the characteristic volcano-like trend upon stepwise replacing CO by CO 2 in the feed gas (Figure  1 ) with amaximum for 2.4 vol. %ofCO 2 . Aiming at explaining this intriguing and long-debated behavior, we designed ahome-made operando cell to conduct synchrotron-based XRPD investigations in Debye-Scherrer geometry under the same reaction conditions in order to follow the changes of the crystalline Cu and ZnO phases at the extremes of the volcano (CO/H 2 and CO 2 /H 2 )a nd under the optimal gas mixture (CO/ CO 2 /H 2 ). Them ethodology of this structural analysis is shown and explained in Figure  2 . Briefly, afused-silica capillary fixed-bed reactor was housed in ah eating block enabling the detection of the diffracted beams and connected to ag as feeding system. Thec omposition of the gas at the reactor outlet was analyzed by an online mass spectrometer. Thecatalyst was initially exposed to CO/H 2 or CO 2 /H 2 (Figure  3a ,t op and middle,r espectively) at 5.0 MPa, 543 K, and 15 000 h À1 .T he final MeOH concentration upon CO hydrogenation was ca. 50 %o ft hat during CO 2 hydrogenation (Figure  3a , top and middle,r espectively). The concentrations of the gas components in the operando studies indicated similar reaction rates as previously measured for this catalyst.  [4d]  TheS XRPD patterns collected during the catalytic runs (Figure  S6 ) were matched through atomistic cluster simulations of the standard crystalline phases of Cu, Zn, and their oxides.T otal scattering methods such as the DFA  [10a]  were applied as they enable am ore effective detection of subnanometer-sized particles and of their shapes with respect to classical approaches like profile analysis,  [10b,c,d]  which is given in Table  S3  for comparison. Thed iffractograms unveiled that the copper particles did not change their  cuboctahedral morphology upon exposure to the different gas compositions.Note that, in view of the high sensitivity of the synchrotron XRPD methodology,changes in the shape of the crystallites would have resulted in clearly detectable anisotropic broadening of the reflections.Wefurther confirmed the preservation of the cubic symmetry of the Cu phase by conducting modulated-excitation SXRPD (ME-SXRPD) experiments (Figure  S7 ), i.e., alternating the feed between CO/Ar and CO 2 /Ar or CO/H 2 and CO 2 /H 2 under the abovementioned reaction conditions every 29 min. Such technique produces difference patterns with ah igher signal-to-noise ratio,t hus enabling the detection of subtle modifications of the crystallites,which may include surface changes in spite of the general bulk nature of XRPD.The retention of the shape of the Cu particles is in striking contrast to previous reports on an impregnated model Cu/ZnO catalyst, which claimed af lattening of the Cu crystallites in CO-containing atmospheres.  [6]  Theo rigin of this discrepancyl ikely is the 10-times lower Cu loading of that material with respect to our commercial bulk system and the application of (sub)ambient pressure during its analysis by SXRPD,X AS,a nd TEM. On the other hand, density functional theory (DFT) calculations exploring the impact of pressure on the morphology of supported metal nanoparticles  [11]  corroborate the spherical shape evidenced at 5.0 MPa. In spite of the unaltered morphology,t he average size of Cu particles increased from 4.9 (Table  S1 ) to 6.0 and 7.1 nm under CO/H 2 and CO 2 /H 2 , respectively (Figure  3b ,t op and middle). In the former case,s intering was gradual (Figure  S6b ) and likely favored by the segregation of Cu from ZnO,i ndicated by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDXS) (Figures 3d,t op,a nd S8), while it was rapid (Figure  S6d ) and possibly induced by the presence of the H 2 Ob yproduct in the latter environment (Figure  3a , middle).  [2]  Since CO 2 hydrogenation is the main reaction pathway to MeOH from mixed syngas,  [4a-d]  we evaluated how the different sizes of the Cu particles induced by CO 2 /H 2 and CO/ H 2 affect the activity of this reaction (Figures  4a  and c , respectively). MeOH was formed over the catalyst pretreated in CO/H 2 in am oderately larger amount than over as ample exposed to CO 2 /H 2 (2.55 vs. 2.40 vol. %, respectively). In both tests,t he Cu particles experienced af urther growth, but they remained smaller (6.7 vs.7 .8 nm) in the sample pretreated in CO/H 2 .T hese observations are in line with the slightly higher CO 2 hydrogenation turnover frequencyo ver Cu/ZnO catalysts featuring ah igher Cu dispersion (d = 5-36 nm, determined ex situ).  [12]  Am inor loss in crystallinity of the Cu phase was detected in ME-SXRPD upon exchanging CO 2 by CO in H 2 or Ar (Figure  S7 band c , respectively), pointing to the surface oxidation of Cu, which was also observed by Auger electron spectroscopy (Figure  S2 c ). However,t he reversible nature of this change does not explain the different catalyst activity after the distinct pretreatments discussed above. In addition, the mass distributions of the ZnO particles were calculated from the SXRPD patterns revealing ah exagonal prism-like morphology.T he average size (6.4 nm) did not change under the CO/H 2 atmosphere (Figure  3c ,top), but largely increased (9.4 nm) upon CO 2 hydrogenation. A preferential growth of the hexagonal base diameter was determined, resulting in flatter ZnO crystallites (Figure  3c , middle). Likely due to the poor contrast between Cu and ZnO,s uch structural alterations were not visualized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of the used materials (Figure  S9 ). Based on the work by Tsang et al.  [5d]  on mechanically-mixed Cu/ZnO/Al 2 O 3 catalysts,itwas expected that the different proportion between the base and the height of the prisms of ZnO would impact the CO 2 hydrogenation rate since the selectivity to MeOH from CO 2 /H 2 was higher over plate-like rather than rod-like particles.T hat difference was explained by an improved electronic interaction with Cu in the former case,originating from an enhanced exhibition of polar facets (e.g., (0001)). Although our selectivity patterns upon CO 2 hydrogenation after the CO 2 /H 2 and CO/H 2 pretreatments (Figures  4a, c ) agree well with Ref. [5d],t he difference in MeOH concentration was rather low in our study (2.55 vs.2.40 vol. %). Consequently,wepropose that the concomitant RWGS reaction is more sensitive to the ZnO morphology,c orroborating the strong inhibiting effect of ZnO covering the Cu phase for this reaction  [4d,13]  and the much higher concentration of CO measured after the CO/H 2 pretreatment (2.81 vs.1.97 vol. %). In order to correlate the alterations at the particle level with the surface chemistry,w ec onducted operando ME-DRIFTS investigations upon CO 2 hydrogenation after pretreatment of the catalyst in CO 2 /H 2 and CO/H 2 (Figures  4b, d , and S10), in analogy to the SXRPD experiments.The gas feed composition was exchanged every 20 min between CO 2 /H 2 and H 2 at 373 Kand 5.0 MPa. Thelower reaction temperature was selected to prevent an excessive CO production, since intense bands of gaseous CO would mask the signals related to adsorbed CO species (Figure  S11 ). As described in greater detail in the Supporting Information, the spectra obtained featured signals attributed to CO adsorbed on low-index (e.g.,( 111), 2058 and 2077 cm À1 )and high-index faces of Cu 0 (e.g.,( 755), 2092 cm À1 ), as well as on Cu + sites (2129 cm À1 )  [9]  irrespective of the pretreatment. Since the RWGS reaction predominantly occurs over the low-index Cu planes,t he Cu particle size may not have as ignificant impact on the reaction rate.Still, CO adsorbed on Cu sites next to ZnO (2058 cm À1 ) was identified in both experiments, which hints to the sensitivity of this reaction to the interaction of Cu with the ZnO particles and, in turn, the size and shape of the latter.T his evidence correlates with the enhancement of the CO 2 hydrogenation and RWGS over Cu 29 clusters on polar ZnO surfaces compared to pure Cu.  [14]  Additional weak features were detected in both ME-DRIFTS experiments (Figures S10 ba nd d). Bands at 1932 and 1910 cm À1 have been associated with CO adsorbed on CuZn x alloys,w hich some studies considered as the active sites in CO 2 hydrogenation.  [5e,g,7]  The changes of the ZnO and Cu reflections in the ME-SXRPD experiment (Figure  S7b ) could be compatible with the reversible formation of such species in line with their observation on the surface of lab-prepared Cu-ZnO-Al 2 O 3 by in situ Auger electron spectroscopy.  [5g]  However,t heir contribution to the RWGS reaction appears to be minor in view of the much stronger intensity of the infrared signals of CO adsorbed on the other Cu sites. Bands of gaseous CO were absent for the sample pretreated in CO 2 /H 2 ,evidencing its hindered desorption when plateletlike structures of ZnO are formed (Figure  4b ). In contrast, prominent and modulating signals of gaseous CO were detected in the measurement conducted after the CO/H 2 pretreatment (Figure  4d ), supporting the higher RWGS activity of as ample in which Cu likely interacts more with non-polar facets of ZnO (e.g.,( 1 À100), Figure  4c ). We propose that, according to the principle of microscopic reversibility,  [15]  the WGS activity relates to the particle structure similarly to the RWGS activity.T his emphasizes the importance of the derived correlations for CO 2 -promoted MeOH synthesis explaining why Cu-ZnO-Al 2 O 3 catalysts with large zinc contents do not catalyze the WGS and, hence, do not feature CO 2 promotion.  [4d]  In line with the catalytic data, the pretreatment does not affect the mechanism of CO 2 hydrogenation (Figures  S10 a-d ). In this respect, the phaseresolved analysis (Figures S10 ba nd d) uncovered two important aspects.F irstly,t he unperturbed intensity of formate bands during the modulation suggests that such species are spectators rather than reaction intermediates,i n contrast to recent kinetic models  [5e,9,16]  but in agreement with studies proposing ac arboxyl (COOH*)-based route.  [17]  Secondly,the detection of bands assigned to methoxy species on Cu and ZnO sites emphasizes the necessity to consider both catalyst components in future molecular studies. In order to unravel the structure of Cu and ZnO in the promotional regime,the catalyst was exposed to mixed syngas (CO/CO 2 /H 2 )with the optimal CO 2 content (R = CO 2 /(CO + CO 2 ) = 12 %, 2.4 vol. %C O 2 ,F igure 1). Thef inal MeOH concentration in this experiment (Figure  3a ,bottom) was ca. 1.6-times larger than the sum of the MeOH concentrations expected for the amounts of CO and CO 2 in the feed, in line with the activity enhancement observed in Figure  1 . Under this condition, the Cu and ZnO particles substantially retained their original size (5.3 and 6.4 nm, respectively, Figure  3b  and c , bottom) and relative distribution (Figure  3d , bottom). It is worth noting that the H 2 Op roduced via CO 2 hydrogenation was almost fully consumed by the WGS reaction (Figure  3a ,b ottom), which might account for the minimized sintering of Cu and ZnO.N evertheless,aslight elongation of the ZnO crystallites along the (0001) axis became evident. To shed light on the impact of the ZnO morphology on the CO 2 promotion, we applied CO/CO 2 /H 2 gas mixtures over samples pretreated in CO 2 /H 2 or CO/H 2 (Figures  4a, c ,respectively) and thus featuring different ZnO particles,asdescribed above.The extent of promotion was ca. 20 %l ower after the former treatment, in line with the hysteresis behavior shown in Figure  1 , i.e., the promotional effect of CO 2 is still present but less pronounced when starting from aC O 2 /H 2 feed with respect to starting from aC O/H 2 feed. Ex situ characterization has excluded that this effect is associated with an irreversible deactivation of the catalyst, e.g.,continuous sintering upon the cycle.  [3b]  Interestingly,the CO 2 hydrogenation rate was similar after the pretreatments in CO 2 /H 2 or CO/H 2 (Figure  4a, c , respectively), substantiating that this reaction is not the limiting step under the promotional regime.A dditionally,i tise vident that CO 2 promotion was suppressed to acomparable extent to the RWGS reaction in samples with platelet-like ZnO crystallites (Figure  4a ). Previous DFT studies on aCusurface did not indicate optimal turnover frequencies nor coverages of intermediates under mixed syngas conditions.  [16]  We therefore explain the top of the cycle (Figure  1 ) mainly as aresult of the depleted contacts between Cu particles and polar ZnO facets due to the elongation of the latter along the hexagonal prism axis (0001) under the optimal CO/CO 2 /H 2 mixture boosting the WGS and consequently the CO 2 promotion. In conclusion, our study established correlations between the Cu and ZnO particle size and morphology,t he reaction mechanism, and the activity of acommercial Cu-ZnO-Al 2 O 3 catalyst upon methanol synthesis under various gas compositions and industrial conditions.O perando SXRPD elucidated that Cu particles retained their cuboctahedral shape but sintered under CO/H 2 and CO 2 /H 2 .T his phenomenon was associated with the segregation of Cu from ZnO upon CO hydrogenation and with the presence of H 2 Ou pon CO 2 hydrogenation. With respect to the hexagonal ZnO particles, aC O/H 2 atmosphere did not provoke significant alterations but growth and formation of platelet-like morphologies were observed under CO 2 /H 2 .S ince CO 2 hydrogenation was only slightly improved over smaller Cu particles and was insensitive to the morphology of ZnO,wededuced that this reaction cannot become al imiting step for the promotional effect. In the CO/CO 2 /H 2 mixture with the optimal CO 2 concentration, the low amount of H 2 Of ormed prevented Cu and ZnO sintering.M oreover,t he ZnO prism-like crystallites preferentially elongated along their hexagonal axis.M E-DRIFTS during reaction evidenced astrong suppression of the RWGS in catalyst samples containing platelet-like ZnO particles.The higher amount of polar facets in these structures leads to enhanced electronic interactions with Cu, which inhibit the active sites on the latter. In contrast, the preferred elongation of ZnO under the optimal gas mixture augmented the fraction of non-polar facets exposed, boosting the WGS reaction and, thus,t he MeOH formation from CO 2 .T hese findings rationalize the promotional effect and indicate that the best catalyst structure for CO 2 -promoted MeOH synthesis comprises small Cu particles in contact with rod-like ZnO crystallites, preferably stabilized by structural promoters.

Experimental Section
TheC u-ZnO-Al 2 O 3 catalyst was purchased in pelletized form (5.5 mm in diameter and 3.6 mm in height) from Alfa Aesar (product No.4 5776). Theb ulk and surface composition, the copper surface area, and the porosity and structure of the fresh catalyst were studied by X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy,t emperature-programmed reduction with H 2 after oxidation with N 2 O, N 2 sorption at 77 K, and scanning (transmission) electron microscopy-energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy.O perando synchrotron X-ray powder diffraction (SXRPD)w as carried out at the X04SA-MS beamline of the Swiss Light Source (SLS) synchrotron of the Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI), Switzerland.  [18]  Theu ndiluted catalyst (W cat = 50 mg,p article size = 75-150 mm) was loaded into ac ustom-made capillary cell connectedt oagas feeding system and am ass spectrometer, activatedi nagas flow (F total = 16.5 cm 3 STP min À1 )o f5vol. %H 2 in Ar at 5.0 MPa and 543 K( 2Kmin À1 )f or 30 min, and then exposed to ag as feed with am olar compositiono f H 2 :CO:Ar (coded "CO/H 2 ") or H 2 :CO 2 :Ar (coded "CO 2 /H 2 ") = 4:1:1.5 or H 2 :CO:CO 2 :Ar (coded "CO/CO 2 /H 2 ") = 4:0.88:0.12:1.5 for 4h.Incertain experiments,the catalyst was additionally contacted with CO 2 /H 2 or CO/CO 2 /H 2 for 4hafter activation and exposure to CO/H 2 or CO 2 /H 2 .I nm odulated-excitationS XRPD (ME-SXRPD) studies,t he activatedc atalyst was subjectedt o1 0c ycles of 57 min during which the gas feed was alternated between two compositions. Theb eam energy was set at 22 keV for optimal penetration. Diffractionp atterns were collected in the 2-1208 8 2 q range over 43.5 (ME-SXRPD) or 60 s(SXRPD)with aresolution of 0.00368 8 2 q with the aid of the position-sensitive single-photon counting MYTHENII detector.  [19]  Measuredd iffraction patterns were background subtracted and fitted by the Debye function analysis method  [9]  deriving mass fractions on the basis of the dimensions of each crystalline phase.T he patterns of the known structures of Cu, Zn, and their oxides were sufficient to match all diffractograms acquired in this study,since the residual patterns were flat and stochastic (except for texture artefacts). Operando modulated-excitation diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (ME-DRIFTS) investigations were performedusing the same reactor set-up employed for the SXRPD analysis but replacing the capillary cell by ahigh-pressure diffuse reflectance reaction chamber (Harrick) placed into aB ruker Equinox 55 spectrometere quippedw ith al iquid-N 2 -cooled MCT detector.T he activated catalyst (W cat = 25 mg, 1:1d ilution with Si (Acros Organics,99%), particle size = 75-150 mm) was pretreated in CO/H 2 or CO 2 /H 2 at 543 Ka nd 5.0 MPa for 4hand then cooled to 373 Ki na nA rf low.A fter complete purging,t he gas flow was alternated betweenm olar H 2 :Ar = 4:2.5 (1200 s) and H 2 :CO 2 :Ar = 4:1:1.5 (1200 s) 10 times.T ime-resolved spectra were acquirede very 60 sa ccumulating 200 scans in the 4000-600 cm À1 range (4 cm À1 resolution)a nd processed by ar eported procedure to derive phaseresolved spectra.  [20]  Further details to these procedures are provided in the SupportingI nformation.