INTRODUCTION
Energy consumption is experiencing a continuous rise, despite the increased tangibility of (anthropogenic) global climate change. Households worldwide are responsible for about onethird of the world energy consumption. This energy is mainly used for heating and cooling of residential areas.  1  The building sector accounted for 25% of the total global energy consumption in 2010, predominantly for space heating and hot water production, 53% and 16%, respectively, of this sector.  2  Furthermore, combined energy demands for heating and especially cooling are forecasted to increase significantly in the coming years, the magnitude of which depends on model assumptions used for the prediction.  1  The urgent need to address this situation has prompted international action from governments and industries; for example, the EU-28 countries have specified ambitious energy efficiency targets, as expressed in Directive 2012/27/EU,  3  to reduce primary energy consumption by 20% in 2020. The Netherlands, specifically, has committed to reduce the total annual energy consumption to 2183 PJ in 2020,  3, 4  a 38% reduction as compared to 2010.  5  Of the total energy consumption in this country, roughly 40% is spent on heating (38.4%) and cooling (2.4%).  5  Especially, the energy demand for cooling in The Netherlands is forecasted to increase substantially in the coming years.  5  This clearly highlights the importance of mitigating primary energy requirements for heating and cooling as a tool to decrease fossil fuel consumption and associated CO 2 emissions. To mitigate (part of) these energetic expenses, one could opt for the utilization of solar energy for these purposes. However, the supply of solar energy and demand for heating are not always in phase.  6  When energy supply and heating demand are in phase, for example, for air-conditioning, refrigeration, and hot water production, thermally driven heat pumps can be employed, sustainably utilizing the available energy (e.g., solar or waste heat), a clear advantage over devices based on vapor compression,  7  which use electrical energy. There are multiple possible working principles for heat pumps driven by thermal energy,  8  for example, chemical reactions,  8, 9  absorption,  8, 10  and adsorption.  8, 11  The main advantage of the adsorption-driven heat pump, which is the method of choice in this Review, is that low driving or regeneration temperatures (<100 °C) can be employed efficiently,  8, 10, [12] [13] [14]  which fits the available temperatures of the desired energy sources (solar, industrial waste heat). Further, environmentally benign working fluids (e.g., water) can be used. A drawback is that the performance of these devices is somewhat lower, for currently available devices, than for alternatives based on chemical reactions or absorption. Additionally, one could further use adsorption-based open system air-conditioning by desiccation.  [13] [14] [15] [16]  A great advantage is that water vapor can be removed directly from the ambient air, whereas the closed devices require cooling of the incoming air to temperatures below the dew point.  17  Often this means that the dried air has to be reheated, resulting in an energetically expensive system. Additional advantages of desiccant air conditioning over vapor compression systems are the ability to use low-grade thermal energy (similar to adsorption-driven heat pumps) and the working fluid (ambient water) is environmentally benign by default. When energy supply and demand are out of phase, temporary energy storage is required. Especially thermochemical storage is interesting, as it requires significantly less volume to store the same amount of energy  18, 19  as compared to systems based on latent  20  or sensible energy.  21  The main alternatives for thermochemical storage primarily store and release energy on the basis of either chemical reactions (e.g., hydration of inorganic salts) or adsorption. Note however that for adsorption-based energy storage, in comparison to latent or sensible energy-based systems, additional low temperature energy is required for the evaporation of the working fluid. This also holds in principle for, for example, the hydration of inorganic salts. Thermochemical energy storage and desiccant air conditioning are considered alternative applications for porous adsorbents here and are concisely discussed in section 2 of this Review, the main focus being adsorption-driven heat pumps. Devices based on this principle could use thermal energy to supply cooling and heating. The working mechanism, in its simplest form, is shown in Figure  1 . An initially dry adsorbent is connected with a working fluidfilled evaporator (Figure  1 , left)). During this process, heat is taken up from the surroundings by evaporation of the working fluid (Q evap ), due to the adsorption of the working fluid by the (porous) adsorbent. As adsorption is exothermic, heat will be released to the surroundings at an intermediate temperature (Q ads ). As the adsorbent will become saturated with working fluid, regeneration is required (Figure  1 , right). Energy is taken up at a relatively high temperature (Q des ) to desorb the working fluid, which is subsequently condensed, releasing heat at an intermediate temperature (Q con ). One can operate such an adsorption cycle as heat pump to produce heat at the intermediate temperature (adsorption heat pump, AHP), using effectively Q con and Q ads or to produce cold at the lower temperature by making use of Q evap (adsorption chiller, AC). A detailed thermodynamic description of such a cycle is located in section 6 of this Review. In any case, the cycle requires thermal energy as input. The temperature of this input can be relatively low (below 100 °C),  12, 13  making efficient use of industrial waste heat or solar energy. Adsorption-driven heat and cold allocation is not a novel technology. After the first quantitative work on adsorption by Scheele and Fontana  23  and the pioneering work of Michael Faraday, who demonstrated adsorptive-based cooling in 1823 using an ammonia-silver chloride working pair,  24, 25  and some early commercial products,  [26] [27] [28]  the technology was swiftly replaced due to the development of more efficient vapor compression systems (based on chlorinated fluorocarbons, CFCs).  23, 25  However, following the prohibition of commonly used fluids in vapor compression (CFCs) because of environmental concerns,  29, 30  and the aforementioned global energy consumption prognosis, research on adsorption-driven heat pumps is again in full swing (timeline depicted in Figure  2 ).  23, 31  For application, the selected working fluid should have a high enthalpy of evaporation. Furthermore, the capacity of the adsorbent should be maximized, implying that working fluid molecules are preferentially relatively small. In addition, the working fluid should be condensable under operating conditions. Obviously, selected working fluids should have no global warming or ozone depletion potential. It is therefore not surprising to say that commonly used working fluids for adsorption-driven purposes are water, methanol, ammonia,  23  and, because of lower toxicity as compared to methanol, ethanol is also used.  11, [32] [33] [34]  As shown in Figure  3 , water has the highest enthalpy of evaporation and ammonia the lowest, making the latter thermodynamically less efficient.  23  However, the high vapor pressure of NH 3 ensures that mass transport limitations are eliminated in cycle times down to the order of minutes.  23  In addition, in AHP/ACs no use can be made of copper-based parts when ammonia is used.  23  Water has a significantly lower vapor pressure (see Figure  3 ) and cannot be used for subzero temperatures, due to its relatively high triple point temperature (273.16 K). Methanol and ethanol both are somewhat intermediate in properties as compared to water and ammonia. In the remainder of this Review, possible working fluids under consideration are indeed water, methanol, ethanol, and ammonia. Different adsorbents can be used in conjunction with these working fluids. Silica gels (water), zeolites (water), and activated carbons (methanol, ammonia) are popular in academia.  23, 33, 36  Commercially, water is dominantly used as working fluid in combination with silica gels or zeolites (vide infra). Regardless of the working pair, an adsorption isotherm with one single very steep uptake step is preferred from an energetic perspective, as this will display the highest thermodynamic efficiency.  37  Also from a dynamic perspective, a stepwise isotherm is preferred,  38, 39  as only a small change in relative sorbate pressure is needed for a large change in loading, that is, a large heat effect (see, e.g., AQSOA-Z01, Figure  4 ). Hysteresis during desorption is undesired, as this will increase the required desorption temperature. For realistic applications, the step in adsorption should be located at p/p o < 0.3 37 -0.4; 40 here, p o represents the saturation pressure, for water (at room temperature), as for higher relative pressures the difference between the low (evaporator) temperature, T e , and intermediate (adsorption/condenser) temperature, T c , becomes increasingly smaller. For example, for 0.3 < p/p o < 0.45, only T e > 10-15 °C and T c < 30 °C can be used, achieving only a minor "temperature lift" (see section 6.5.3).  37  Furthermore, the reversible step in adsorption (or desorption in case of hysteresis) should be preferentially located at p/p o > 0.05  40  -0.1  37  to ensure a sufficiently low desorption temperature. For methanol and ethanol, the operating windows are similar to that of water; for ammonia, this is shifted to higher relative pressures (0.15 < p/p o < 0.55). Nishiyodo  41  and Mycom pioneered the recommercialization of adsorption-driven devices, in both cases based on silica gelwater as working pair.  31, 42  Later, Sortech marketed silica gelbased sorption systems for cooling purposes.  31  Invensor has made a commercial coated zeolite-water-based cooling system.  31, 43  Both Vaillant and Viesmann  44  have commercialized zeolite-water-based heat pumps driven by the combustion of natural gas, which can in principle reduce the energy requirements of a conventional household boiler by up to 30%.  31  Commercially applied sorbents that perhaps show most advantageous adsorption isotherms, when contacted with water, are those of the FAM Z-series (functional adsorbent material zeolite). FAM Z05,  45  and especially both Z01  46  and Z02  47  as commercialized by Mitsubishi Plastics, although referred to as the AQSOA tm series,  48  show very suitable adsorption character-   istics. Adsorption isotherms of commercially used adsorbents are shown in Figure  4 . Zeolite Y has a very steep uptake at extremely low p/p o , due to the strongly hydrophilic nature of high Al-content zeolites. This in turn means that regeneration needs to be done at unfeasibly high desorption temperatures, a commonly reported drawback for application of these materials.  37  On the other hand, pure silica zeolites are too hydrophobic.  37  The adsorption behavior of silica gel is not desired, due to the clear absence of a stepwise uptake. The FAM/AQSOA tm series show this stepwise uptake, and especially Z01 and Z02 are employed in heat pumps (Z05 is used primarily for dehumidification).  48  AQSOA-Z02 is the SAPO-34 zeotype, whereas Z01 and Z05 are AlPO-5 materials (of which Z01 is partially iron-exchanged). These materials have been shown to exhibit high cyclic stability to adand desorption of water.  49, 50  The total uptake (capacity) of these materials, however, is somewhat low. From the above, it is clear that there is a large commercial interest in the development of new adsorption-based devices, and that the market for such devices is expected to grow as performance improves.  31  Such a scenario could be realized by different approaches.  31  Increasing specific power input through enhanced mass and heat transport by, for example, the use of coated adsorbents,  31, 51  or decreasing the heat input by improved cycle design and/or heat integration are two approaches being explored for already defined working pairs.  31, 52  On the other hand, the development of novel working pairs can certainly improve performance  37, [53] [54] [55] [56]  for example by decreasing the required desorption temperature.  31  In this Review, we critically assess the feasibility for application in adsorption-driven heating and cooling of one specific emerging class of porous adsorbents: metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). MOFs, comprising inorganic clusters connected by organic ligands in one, two, or three dimensions,  57  display a rich variety of topologies. The combination of organic ligands and inorganic building blocks  58  makes up for an almost infinite number of different possible structures, where seemingly the sky is the limit regarding porosity and surface area.  59, 60  In addition, the organic ligands can be decorated with functional moieties, by either pre-or postsynthesis, to tune material properties.  [61] [62] [63] [64] [65]  No wonder that MOFs have received attention for application in, for example, adsorption/separation,  [66] [67] [68] [69]  storage,  70, 71  and catalysis.  [72] [73] [74] [75]  In the first part of this Review, we summarize the state of the art in MOF science with regard to stability and adsorption behavior for the aforementioned working fluids. To be able to understand, and to possibly tune, the adsorption of vapors in MOFs, one should have insight into the mechanism of adsorption. This will be described first concerning the experimental and simulation point of view (section 2). Of the utmost importance for the targeted application is further knowledge about the solvothermal (in)stability, as will be discussed second in a clear and concise manner (section 3). Subsequently, an overview of known adsorption behavior (section 4) results in a selection of the most promising MOFs in section 5. This will comprise all four selected working fluids, water (section 4.1), methanol (section 4.2), ethanol (section 4.3), and ammonia (section 4.4), although water will be dominantly present in the discussion, as it has received by far the most attention in scientific literature. In the second part of this Review, the thermodynamic efficiency and storage capacity for these materials will be determined and compared to conventional sorbents (section 6), and advantages that MOFs might hold for thermochemical energy storage and open cycle desiccant air-conditioning are discussed concisely in section 7. A comprehensive summary and a detailed future perspective are both presented in section 8.

ADSORPTION MECHANISM
According to Canivet et al., three different mechanisms for water adsorption in MOFs can be distinguished:  76  adsorption on the metallic cluster, which modifies the first coordination sphere of the metal ion (irreversible); layer or cluster adsorption in pores (reversible); and capillary condensation in pores (irreversible). Note that reversibility here is defined by thermodynamics and is not meant to include irrevocable loss of structural fidelity (instability), which is discussed separately (section 3). As most MOFs consist of aromatic ligands, which are hydrophobic in nature, cluster adsorption is prevalent over layer formation when water is concerned. Clusters of water can be formed around three different types of sites. First, for MOFs that have coordinatively unsaturated sites (cus) on the metal ions after solvent removal, water can be clustered around those sites. As mentioned already, the first water molecule will then be irreversibly adsorbed, modifying the coordination sphere of said ion. Terminal groups on the metal-ions of the cluster, when present, are predominantly hydroxido-species, which can also act as nucleation sites for clustering of water. Finally, hydrophilic functional groups can be attached to the organic ligand, adding additional nucleation sites. Whether fully reversible cluster-based adsorption or irreversible capillary condensation occurs will depend on pore size. In pores with a diameter smaller than a certain critical diameter, D c , water adsorption occurs solely by cluster formation; for pore diameters larger than D c , water is adsorbed due to capillary condensation, preceded by cluster adsorption.  76, 77  The former case yields continuous reversible adsorption, whereas the latter will result in a hysteretic difference between ad-and desorption behavior, due to the thermodynamic irreversibility of capillary condensation.  76, 77  According to Coasne et al., this critical pore diameter can be expressed as  78, 79   σ = - D T T T 4 c c c Table 1. MOFs Examined for Water Adsorption in Scientific Literature a material ligand α b [-] q max [g g -1 ] -Δ ads H [kJ mol -1 ] V p c [cm 3 g -1 ] stability d ref M 3 (μ 3 -O)(X)(cus) 2 e MIL-101(Cr) TPA 0.45 1 (ThS-hi 100 )  102, 196, 198, 203, [249] [250] [251] [252]     102, 196, 198, 203, [249] [250] [251] [252]  TPA 0.48 1.4 70-35 h 1.58 (ThS-hi 100 )  102, 196, 198, 203, [249] [250] [251] [252]     102, 196, 198, 203, [249] [250] [251] [252]      ,196,198,203,249-       104, 106, 212, 231, 256, 257, 259, 260  UiO-66(Zr)-NH 2 NH 2 -TPA 0.16 0.34 0.52 (HK-hi 100 )  22, 62, 104, 231, 257, 261  UiO-66(Zr)-       102, 114, 203, 231, 255, 256, 275  Cu-BTC BTC 0.1 0.5 0.72 (LK-hi 100 )  102, 114, 203, 231, 255, 256, 275  showing reversible, cluster-based adsorption, structure-water interactions should be tuned with scrutiny, in sharp contrast to mesoporous materials. For example, Castillo et al. have shown, using classical force fields, that simulating water adsorption in Cu-BTC is extremely sensitive to attributed partial charges, responsible for electrostatic interactions between host and guest, and that subsequently considerate tuning is required to commensurate computational results with experiments.  82  Using similar methods, without tuning, satisfying predictions were obtained for Al(OH) (1,4-ndc).  83  Ghosh et al. found for UiO-Table  1 . continued   84  and classical force fields, the structure is significantly more hydrophobic in silico (using) than in reality.  85  By inducing defects via replacing an organic ligand and replacing it with OH-groups, a significantly more hydrophilic structure can be obtained, although a small hysteresis with experimental results remains.  85  Zang et al. found, in line with previously discussed results, that classical force fields cannot describe water adsorption in copper-based MOFs.  86  When employing more accurate and computationally more expensive DFT-derived force fields, at best a fair coherence with experiments is obtained.  86  This in contrast to, for example, CO 2 -adsorption in nanoporous materials, which is seemingly nearly perfectly reproduced with these DFT-derived force fields.  87, 88  In the same line, Lin et al. material ligand α b [-] q max [g g -1 ] -Δ ads H [kJ mol -1 ] V p c [cm 3 g -1 ] stability d ref M 6 (μ 3 -O) 4+x (μ 3 -OH) material ligand α b [-] q max [g g -1 ] -Δ ads H [kJ mol -1 ] V p c [cm 3 g -1 ] stability d ref [M(μ 2 -OH)] n CAU-10(Al)-CH material ligand α b [-] q max [g g -1 ] -Δ ads H [kJ mol -1 ] V p c [cm have developed a different DFT-derived force field for CO 2adsorption in MOF-74(Zn,Mg), showcasing accurate reproduction of adsorption measurements in silico.  89  The same protocol, however, only exhibits reasonable reproduction of water adsorption in these materials, in line with the findings of Zang et al.  89  On the basis of the preceding discussion, it seems difficult to describe with computational methods of varying complexity the experimentally determined adsorption data. This can only mean that these computational methods are not mature enough for in silico design or computational screening. This in sharp contrast with, for example, H 2 storage  90  or CO 2 capture,  91, 92  where screening methods are more precise. For alcohols, coherence of simulated and experimentally observed adsorption is much more easily obtained, even when using classical force fields.  80, [93] [94] [95] [96]  Mechanistically speaking, when compared to water, alcohols show in general a less sharp uptake profile in MOFs due to their lower polarity,  80  and lowered repulsion from the aromatic ligands. Furthermore, seemingly chemisorption is not observed in the literature for alcohols. In the case of ammonia, most data available in the literature come from in silico studies. Snurr et al. have elaborately discussed NH 3 adsorption in MOFs using quantum-chemistry derived force fields,  [97] [98] [99]  showing that in principle a steep uptake can be achieved, at usefully low (relative) pressure, for various frameworks.  97  These studies, however, did not consider chemisorption effects and instability of the investigated MOFs toward ammonia (section 4.4), thus limiting the relevance of these adsorption predictions for performance assessment. Furthermore, there are little to no experimental adsorption measurements available to benchmark these predictions.

STABILITY
For application in AHP/ACs, MOF stability is of utmost importance. Degradation under prolonged exposure to the adsorptive of choice is unacceptable. Especially regarding water, this is a limiting constraint for application. Before discussing the factors that determine the differences in structural stability in detail, different levels of hydrothermal stability will be defined. Subsequently, an overview will be presented of techniques to increase stability of MOFs, be it in situ or postsynthetic, with focus on their potential use for AHP/ACs. In a recent review on water stability in MOFs, Burtch et al. conveniently defined four successive levels of stability: 100 thermodynamic stability (ThS), stable after long-term exposure to aqueous solutions; high kinetic stability (HK), stable after exposure to high relative humidity, decomposes after short exposure to liquid water; low kinetic stability (LK), stable after exposure to low relative humidity only; and unstable (Uns), where any exposure to moisture will cause loss of structural integrity. Eligibility to the thermodynamic stability level is considered after structural survival after exposure of at least 7 days to pure water and at least 1 day for boiling or basic/acidic conditions. 100 For the subsequent levels, proof requires significantly less stringency. Analysis of the extent of degradation, after exposure to applied conditions, should minimally consist of the retention of crystallinity (using, e.g., X-ray diffraction) and porosity (using adsorptive characterization).  100  In fact, the authors recommend one use the BETanalysis for this quantification specifically, but in light of our recent work on the inconsistencies that can arise when determining a specific surface area using this method,  101  we here advocate one use adsorption capacities (at saturation) instead. This classification suits well to discriminate between different MOF structures on a qualitative level. Adhering to this classification, eligibility for AHP/ACs can only be considered for thermodynamic and high kinetic stability. As a material employed in AHP/ACs has to endure a large number of adsorption-desorption cycles, stability over many of these cycles has to be ensured in addition. Last, one should take into account that determining the relative stability of any structure is indeed a clear function of the application (conditions) envisaged. The aforementioned levels of stability are indicated, if possible, in Table  1  when no information on (cyclic) stability is reported alongside the adsorptive behavior of the listed MOFs. Water can potentially damage metal-oxide clusters through ligand-displacement, replacing a ligand by a water molecule, or by forming a metal-hydroxide bond and a (partially) protonated ligand.  102  Whether and to what extent these will occur is a function of several factors, as first explored in the pioneering work of  Low et al. 102  These factors can be subdivided into two main categories. First, there are factors determining whether an irreversible reaction of water within the MOF structure is thermodynamically favorable. 100 Second, of interest especially for structures for which water reactions are energetically favorable, there are factors that determine whether this reaction will occur (kinetics/sterics). 100 Note that while these factors are discussed individually, they cannot always be completely separated in reality.  103  Last, as these factors are described in the literature in sufficient detail already,  76, 100, 102, 103  allow us to be relatively brief in highlighting current knowledge. The factors identified in literature in the former category, determining the energetic feasibility of degradation reactions, revolve around the strength of the interaction of the inorganic cluster with the surrounding organic ligands, most often the structure's heel of Achilles, and the stability of the cluster toward water.  100, 103  The most important aspects in controlling the hydrolytic stability considered currently are the valence of the metal ions, the nature of the metal, the filling of the coordination sphere of the inorganic cluster, and ligand pK a . The (formal) valence of the metal ion is of importance, as MOFs that incorporate trivalent metal ions seem to be more stable than bivalent metal ions,  100, 102, 103  and high stability is ascribed to tetravalent Zr/ Hf-based MOFs.  100, [104] [105] [106] [107]  As MOF coordination is perceived to be governed by Lewis acid/base chemistry,  100, 103  MOFs comprising basic ligands (e.g., imidazolate, pK a ≈ 18-19) exhibit a higher hydrothermal stability than acidic ligands (e.g., carboxylates, pK a ≈ 4).  71, 102, 103, [108] [109] [110]  Chemical Reviews Metal ions that show 6-fold coordination tend to be more stable than those that have 4-fold coordination, because denser filling of the coordination sphere makes coordination of water to the metal-ion more difficult.  102, 111  In addition, the nature of the metal species plays an important role in stability.  100, 102, 103  Comparing, for example, the relative stability of bivalent metal ions in isostructural M(BDC) (TED/DABCO) 0.5 ,  112, 113  one would observe that hydrolysis occurs in the Cu-based MOF, ligand replacement of the TED ligands by water takes place for the Zn-and Co-based structures, whereas incorporation of Ni results in a relatively stable structure.  112, 113  Further, Cu-BTC shows moderate stability,  105, 114, 115  whereas isoreticular Zn-BTC collapses upon solvent removal.  116  Last, MIL-53(Cr) is more stable toward water than MIL-53(Al), and in turn more stable than isotypic MIL-47(V), which decomposes rapidly in the presence of liquid water.  117  Not surprisingly based on the preceding discussion, MOFs of the isoreticular IRMOF-series, all comprising the Zn 4 O-cluster, degrade in the presence of even low moisture concentrations.  118, 119  On the basis of various computational approaches on IRMOF-1, it was found that the critical water content for degradation is somewhere between 4% and 6% wt.  [120] [121] [122]  In accordance with the stability factors discussed above, MIL-100(Cr), comprising trivalent, 6-fold coordinated, chromium clusters, was found to be completely water stable, 114 as well as tetravalent zirconium atom-containing UiO-66.  104, 105, 123  On the basis of the preceding, one might expect MIL-101(Al)-based materials to be stable as well. Unfortunately, NH 2 -MIL-101(Al) is transformed to NH 2 -MIL-53(Al), the thermodynamically stable phase, 124 upon contact with liquid water.  125  The aforementioned stability of MIL-53(Al) is thought to be due to sterically more shielded one-dimensional inorganic building units in  126, 127  In addition, MIL-53(Al) slowly decomposes in liquid water (80 °C).  117  More specifically, a γ-AlO(OH)-phase is formed at the exterior of MIL-53(Al) crystals, consuming part of the MOF.  128  A maximum conversion of around 20% can be achieved, 128 forming an impermeable layer.  128   Qian et al. reported, in  contrast, that MIL-53(Al) is hydrothermally stable, 129 although after closer inspection a reduction in pore volume and XRD reflections belonging to the γ-AlO(OH)-phase 128 can be also observed, albeit only after 3 days.  129  As MIL-53(Al) was synthesized under different conditions, the rate of degradation might be due to differences in material quality. Attempts have been made by researchers to enhance the water stability of MOFs, mostly by influencing kinetic factors. By preventing water molecules from entering the pores of the MOF entirely ("pore hydrophobicity" 100 ) or by hindering water molecules to cluster around the inorganic cluster ("internal hydrophobicity" 100 ), thermodynamically unstable clusters can be made stable from a kinetic perspective. Interesting developments regarding external or pore hydrophobicity of MOF materials have been developed recently, by creating in one way or another an exterior layer impermeable to water.  [130] [131] [132] [133] [134] [135] [136] [137] [138]  These approaches have indeed significantly increased the lifetime of the targeted MOF to ambient moisture by using the shielding exterior layer to prevent water from entering the structure entirely. Although exterior shielding in a hydrophobic matrix can potentially be extremely beneficial for using water-unstable (or hydrophilic) MOFs for, for example, gas separation in mixed matrix membranes,  [139] [140] [141] [142] [143] [144] [145] [146]  this approach obviously fails to be of use in AHP/ACs, as all water is banned from the porous structure entirely and negligible adsorption may occur, rendering the material useless (for water as working fluid). Interpenetrated growth of crystals, or catenation, can also result in an increased inherent water stability of MOFs, as was demonstrated for MOF-508 (Zn(BDC)(BPY) 0.5 ).  147  Uncatenated MOF-508, even with decorated methyl-groups, loses almost all porosity, while 2-fold interpenetrated MOF-508, without any water repellent functional groups, retains full adsorption capacity after exposure to water.  147  The increased stability is attributed to a higher thermodynamic stability of catenated structures and a significantly reduced water adsorption capacity.  147  The road most often traveled to increase hydrothermal stability is by ligand functionalization. Here, the focus again lies on making the material more hydrophobic, by utilizing organic ligands with water-repellent functionalities during MOF synthesis.  110, 135,  Postfunctionalization of MOFs,  [170] [171] [172] [173]  a powerful technique to overcome the limitations of "isoreticular" synthesis in creating new MOF materials, 174 has been applied less frequently.  125, [175] [176] [177] [178]  Unfortunately, the downside of these two approaches is that the majority of the materials that have undergone this functionalization no longer adsorb appreciable amounts of water, as was the case for exterior shielding. Interestingly though, there are MOFs with repellent functions that nevertheless retain water adsorption after modification.  110, 148, 152, 156, 157  A somewhat paradoxical method to increase hydrothermal stability is the introduction of hydrophilic amine groups, as was shown for MOF-5(Zn)-NH 2 (IRMOF-3).  73, 179  The increase in stability was reasoned to be due to hydrogen-bonding interactions between hydrogen of the amine and oxygen of adjacent carboxylates.  180  Another reason is thought to be the creation of alternative adsorption sites on the organic ligand, which can reduce the water concentration at the inorganic cluster.  181  A more suitable approach to enhance stability might be the (partial) exchange of metal-ions. For example, interchanging all Zn with Be in the M 4 O-core of IRMOFs makes the material much more tolerant toward water, due to an increase in the activation energy barrier for hydrolysis.  182, 183  Partial ion substitution (doping) 184 of MOF-5(Zn) with Ni increases the water tolerance of the parent structure as well.  185, 186  In conclusion, Burtch et al. identified the qualitative stability of over 200 structures, 100 of which roughly 10% exert thermodynamic stability, 60% high kinetic stability, 20% low kinetic stability, and 10% instability toward water. Currently, however, there are more than 20 000 MOF structures known, 100 of which the majority is based on bivalent metal ions. Although for most of these structures, information on hydrothermal stability is scarce, these have in general (hydrothermal) stability issues.  187, 188  Thus, it is highly likely that the percentage of structures that are unstable to water far exceeds 10%. As summarized concisely (vide supra), there are pathways that may lead to stabilization of MOFs, but the majority of these aim at avoiding any water adsorption in the structure, making them useless for the application at hand. To end with a positive note, there exist MOF structures that show sufficient water stability for application in AHP/ACs, and of which the adsorptive behavior will be assessed in the next section. Solvothermal stability for methanol and ethanol is seemingly thought to be less of an issue for MOFs 189 and is henceforth not investigated in such detail in academia. Studies concerning MOF (in)stability toward ammonia are seldom conducted. Stability will thus be discussed alongside ammonia adsorption (section 4.4), as detailed insights on degradation mechanisms seem to be mostly limited to water.

ADSORPTIVE PROPERTIES
In this section, a comprehensive overview of different MOF structures and their water, methanol, ethanol, and ammonia adsorption behavior is listed in Tables  1 2 3 4 , respectively. For each of the individual structures, the parameter α is indicated, defined by Canivet et al.  77  as the relative pressure at which onehalf of the structure is filled with a working fluid of choice. This indicator may help in differentiating materials with uptake inand outside of the operating window. For water as adsorptive, α < 0.05 indicates that a material would be too hydrophilic, whereas for α > 0.45 a material is too hydrophobic. The α-value by Canivet et al.  77  is thus used to distinguish between hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity instead of the quantitative Weitkamp hydrophobicity index, 190 which has been employed for a variety of adsorbents.  [191] [192] [193] [194] [195]  This as the former is more easily related to the application at hand, and the latter is more difficult to determine as it comprises measuring the coadsorption of water and toluene (or methylcyclohexane). The drawback of the chosen method is that α changes as a function of temperature (see eq 21) and should thus preferably be measured at or close to room temperature. Furthermore, the maximum uptake of the working fluid, q max (per unit mass), listed in Tables  1 2 3 4 , is invaluable for an initial assessment of feasibility. Although, for application, it is preferred to compare materials based on capacity per unit volume (section 6.5), q max does not require information on material density and is thus more easily determined. As the benchmark materials display, for water, 0.2 < q max < 0.3 g g -1 (Figure  4 ) and has generally speaking a higher (crystallographic) density than MOFs (Table  6 ), as MOFs displaying q max < 0.2 g g -1 can already be deemed unsatisfactory for application. These tables are further supplemented with the enthalpy of adsorption, Δ ads H, the pore volume based on N 2 adsorption, V p , and remarks about material stability, indicated when available. In the case of water, for publications that contain no clear indication about hydro(thermal) stability, the classification of Burtch et al. has been used where possible.  100  The specific surface areas (BET) of these materials are ignored, because without the actual conditions used to determine these, and they are often omitted in practice, surface areas are by no means a proper indicator/comparator.  101  The main findings from the literature will be discussed individually. For water (Table  1 ), tri-and tetravalent MOFs are subdivided into existing cluster configurations and discussed first, followed by bivalent zeolite-imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) and pillared MOFs and the presumably less stable remaining bivalent Znand Cu-based MOFs, whereafter a set of miscellaneous structures is listed. For the remaining adsorptives, this subdivision is not explicitly made due to significantly less availability of literature.

Water Adsorption (Table 1)
Mesoporous MIL-101(Cr) 196 has received significant attention for application in heat pumps in the literature (confer Table  1 ), due to its robustness and high capacity. Indeed up to 1.6 g H2O g -1 can be adsorbed in  Unfortunately, a significant fraction of this loading is achieved at p/p o > 0.4, which decreases the material's applicability in AHP/ACs. Because of the large pore sizes of MIL-101(2.9, 3.4 nm), capillary condensation occurs at these undesirably high relative pressures, resulting in an undesired desorption hysteresis. By functionalizing (part of) the organic ligands, one can make the internal surface more hydrophilic. The addition of NO 2 -,  77, 198, 199  NH 2 -,  77, 198, 199  or SO 3 H-groups 198 to MIL-101(Cr) shifts the step in adsorption to lower p/p o , where α is highest for unfunctionalized MIL-101(Cr) and lowest for MIL-101(Cr)-SO 3 H. For the amino-and nitro-functionalized MOFs, the location of the step in desorption is hardly altered. As reasoned by Canivet et al., because of the presence of hydrophilic groups, more water molecules adsorb before capillary condensation occurs, effectively reducing the actual volume to be filled during condensation and thus reducing the p/p o required for this condensation.  77  During desorption, however, the filled volumes are very similar, resulting in desorption occurring at similar p/p o for all functionalized and unfunctionalized materials. For MIL-101(Cr)-SO 3 H, the hysteretic difference in p/p o between the ad-and desorption branch is significantly enhanced, because water is more difficult to remove due to the strong interaction of the sulfonic groups with water. Subsequently, for adequate desorption, lower p/p o and thus higher desorption temperature are required as compared to the other MIL-101(Cr)-based materials, highly undesired for AHP/ACs. MIL-100(Cr), 200 containing the same inorganic cluster as MIL-101(Cr) but trimesic acid instead of terephthalic acid as linker, contains smaller mesoporous cages (2.5, 2.9 nm) than MIL-101(Cr). These smaller cages make that the step in adsorption is beneficially shifted to lower p/p o (α ≈ 0.  3-0.35, 201,202  where α > 0.4 for MIL-101), while retaining a large water capacity (up to 0.8 g H2O g -1 ).  201  Attempts to decorate MIL-100(Cr) with hydrophilic moieties have been directed toward modification of the chromium-oxide cluster via grafting with organic components 202 or counterion-replacement 201 and replacement of chromium with other metals.  40  Grafting the cussites in MIL-100(Cr) with either (mono, di, and tri)ethylene glycols or ethylene diamine results in a negligible decrease of α. 202 However, replacing fluoride-counterions with sulfate does result in an appreciable decrease in p/p o required for adsorption (α ≈ 0.25).  201  The effect of changing from chromium to either iron or aluminum does not seem to have a clear effect on adsorption behavior (confer Figure  5 ). The fact that the metal in the inorganic cluster is of little importance in these large mesoporous cavities is in line with the capillary condensation mechanism, driven by water-water interactions.  80  Both MIL-100 and MIL-101 show high water uptake capacities and decent stability (Table  1 ), but most of the uptake occurs at high p/p o , limiting the applicability to small temperature lifts (section 6.5.3). Another MOF investigated for application in adsorptiondriven transformation of heat is titanium(IV)-based microporous MIL-125(Ti)-NH 2 . 204 Not only is the step in adsorption uptake beneficially shifted to lower p/p o ,  77, 205  the amine-group makes the MOF more stable toward aqueous solutions, 205 in a similar fashion as the increased stability of MOF-5 upon incorporation of amino-moieties.  73, 180  Although MIL-125(Ti)-NH 2 is thermally stable up to ∼550 K, cycling between ad-(5.6 kPa H 2 O, 40 °C) and desorption (5.6 kPa H 2 O, 140 °C) results in a 17% decrease in maximum water loading after 40 cycles.  22  As the stability of MOFs in contact with water vapor is a function of both vapor pressure and temperature, 102 cycling thus between milder conditions might increase cyclic stability. On that note, given the stepwise isotherm of MIL-125(Ti)-NH 2 , desorption could be operated at far lower temperatures (70-90 °C, depending on conditions). CAU-1(Al),  206  which is isostructural to MIL-125(Ti)-NH 2 but contains μ 2 -methoxy-species instead of bridging μ 2 -oxygen, shows increased hydrophobicity, most likely due to these methoxy-species. The different postfunctionalization reactions performed on the amino-moiety increase the undesired hydrophobicity of this MOF further.

Chemical Reviews
Zirconium(IV)-based UiO-66(Zr) and derivatives 106 have been explored for application in heat pumps.  22  Of this series, especially UiO-66(Zr)-NH 2 shows interesting water adsorption behavior. As compared to MIL-125(Ti)-NH 2 , cyclic stability is worse as the decrease in water capacity is significantly larger for UiO-66(Zr)-NH 2 (38% reduction in capacity over 40 cycles  22  ). This in contrast with previous findings, which claim that UiO-66(Zr)-NH 2 is stable when exposed to water vapor.  104, 105  The difference in stability might be due to elongated exposure to water vapor as compared to other procedures, or alternatively, due to defect chemistry. It has been demonstrated for UiO-66 and derivatives that, depending on synthesis conditions, the number of organic ligands connected to the inorganic cluster can be much lower than in a perfect crystal.  85, [207] [208] [209]  More defects have a positive effect on adsorption capacity, 207 decrease hydrophobicity,  85  but have an adverse effect on thermal stability.  208, 210  It is perfectly possible that these defects also have an adverse effect on the material's tolerance toward water, or that the thermal stability in defected UiO-66(Zr)-NH 2 is no longer sufficient. Dwelling on the latter, it has been demonstrated that the amino-group decreases the thermal stability of the UiO-66 structure.  104  De Coste et al. reported for UiO-67(Zr), isostructural to UiO-66(Zr) but with elongated BPDC-ligands, instability toward water vapor.  104  This decreased stability was claimed to be due to the torsional strain experienced in the crystalline structure of UiO-67(Zr), making it more susceptible to structural breakdown.  104  In a more recent publication, it was reported that the instability may be caused by surface-tension driven collapse of the structure during activation.  211  When the water present in UiO-67(Zr) is solvent-exchanged with acetone prior to thermal activation, the materials displayed no degradation.  211  Others have erroneously claimed that the lower water capacity of UiO-67(Zr) as compared to UiO-66(Zr) is due to hydrophobic domains within the structure, devoid of water at saturation capacity.  22  Defect chemistry is probably of less influence on UiO-67(Zr), as missing linker defects are not as frequently observed for this structure as for UiO-66(Zr).  207, 209  During cyclic operation in AHP/ACs, solvent-exchange is not an option, making UiO-67(Zr) not suitable for application (with water as adsorptive). Furukawa et al. investigated water adsorption and the stability of a set of novel MOFs incorporating the same Zr-cluster as in the UiOseries, connected by a variety of linkers, 212 some of which show remarkable water uptake. As repeated isotherm measurements were performed separated only by brief intermediate evacuation at room temperature, no distinction can be made between intrinsic instability and strong binding of water to certain sites. For example, the authors found a strong decrease in adsorption capacity of water-stable zeolite 13X after the first cycle, because brief evacuation at room temperature is unsufficient to desorb the strongly adsorbed water. This is especially relevant, as many of these novel MOFs have intrinsically a coordination number lower than 12, which means that they have coordinatively unsaturated sites, which might bind water strongly. Nonetheless, especially MOF-801(Zr) and MOF-841(Zr) show high reversibility of water adsorption with favorable S-shaped isotherms. This reversibility is also reflected in the moderate values reported for the isosteric heat of adsorption, making them excellent candidates for AHP/ACs, assuming that cyclic thermal regeneration of these materials does not cause degradation, as was the case for UiO-66(Zr) and UiO-67(Zr). Kaskel et al. reported a set of zirconium-and hafnium-based MOFs and investigated water uptake.  107, 213, 214  DUT-52(Zr), DUT-53(Zr), DUT-67(Zr), and DUT-68(Zr) show interesting stepwise adsorption behavior.  213, 214  Unfortunately, for DUT-52(Zr) and DUT-53(Zr), the sorption hysteresis loop is not fully closed during desorption, losing a large part of the working capacity.  213  This is less of an issue for DUT-67(Zr) and DUT-68(Zr), which however have the steps in uptake at somewhat inconveniently high relative pressures (α ≥ 0.35), limiting the material to low temperature lift applications. 214 DUT-67(Hf) and DUT-68(Hf) have adsorption behavior nearly identical to that of their zirconiumcounterparts.  214  The adsorption capacity, however, when expressed per unit mass of adsorbent, is lower as hafnium is a heavier element than zirconium. NU-1000(Zr) has the highest water adsorption capacity (on a weight basis) of all zirconium-based MOFs in Table  1 , but the material is too hydrophobic (α = 0.75).  215  Further, it collapses upon activation when water is present in the pores, as was the case for UiO-67(Zr).  211  Using solvent-assisted ligand incorporation (SALI) post synthesis, hydrophobic organic molecules of varying length were added to unsaturated metal sites (SALI-n) to increase water-repellent behavior.  215  By adding instead hydrophilic chains, the material properties might be tuned toward application in AHP/ACs. The effect of these added ligands on the stability toward activation is unclear. The MOFs discussed so far have in common that the inorganic cluster has a defined number of metal ions, resulting in a three-dimensional structure. There are, however, MOFs that contain polymeric metal-hydroxide or metal-oxide chains extending infinitely in one dimension. Of these, metal- hydroxide containing MIL-53  216, 217  is arguably the most wellknown, because of its reversible structural expansion upon adsorption of different guests. This effect, often referred to as "breathing", 218 has the adverse effect that it often introduces undesired hysteretic behavior,  77, 219  despite being microporous (d p < D c (2 nm)). The water capacity of MIL-53 and derived materials is disappointingly low and the step in uptake is at an unfeasibly high p/p o for AHP/ACs. Vanadium-based MIL-47, 220 a rigid MOF with structure similar to that of MIL-53, is devoid of "breathing" effects and might be of interest, were it not that this structure is not stable when contacted with H 2 O 117 and deteriorates even when decorated with fluorine-groups.  221  CAU-10(Al)-H, 222 another metal-hydroxide chain MOF, containing isophthalic acid and cis-connected AlO 6 -polyhedra that form helical chains, shows a very favorable steep uptake step at p/p o = 0.18 and a decent capacity of ∼38 wt %.  222  Furthermore, the material is stable under repetitive water adsorption, has reasonably low heat of adsorption, and can be even grown directly on heat exchanger (aluminum) surfaces, making it an excellent candidate for AHP/ACs.  223, 224  Froḧlich et al. have shown that CAU-10(Al)-H does not lose any capacity over 700 adsorption cycles, showing its high stability.  225  The resulting coating is stable during repetitive adsorption as well (at least 10 cycles with any loss of capacity).  224  Decorating CAU-10(Al) with either hydrophilic or hydrophobic moieties introduces a significantly less favorable adsorption performance (Table  1 ). Replacing isophthalic acid with trans-1,4-cyclohexane-dicarboxylic acid (CAU-13(Al)) also yields a steep step in uptake albeit with low capacity (0.16 g g -1 ).  226  Al-fumarate, containing Al-OH chains and fumaric acid, also has a favorable isotherm for adsorption-driven reallocation of heat and cold.  227  The isotherm is similar in shape and uptake to that of CAU-10(Al)-H, but the step occurs at slightly higher p/p o . Further, Jeremias et al. were able to grow this MOF on supports using the thermal gradient method.  228  Unfortunately, the resulting material is not perfectly stable when exposed to repeated adsorption cycles, as a ∼13% loss in capacity can be observed over the first 40 adsorption cycles.  227  On the other hand, the coated material virtually did not show any further loss of capacity between 1500 and 4500 cycles, making the material still interesting for application.  227  For MOF-74 111 (first named CPO-27  229  or M/DOBDC 230 ) materials, which can be synthesized with a variety of metal ions (Zn, Mg, Ni, or Co), water adsorption behavior is strikingly similar (for Mg, Ni, Co).  212, 230, 231  Adsorption occurs primarily at very low p/p o , due to the irreversible adsorption of H 2 O molecules on the cus-sites of the metal incorporated in the structure. The structure of MOF-74(Zn) was shown to collapse at 10% relative humidity (300 K), in line with the reported instability of many other zinc-based MOFs, as discussed previously. Dietzel et al., however, claim that the structure of Zn-based MOF-74 can be fully recovered upon dehydration.  229  For MOF-74(Co), dehydration is fully reversible as well.  229  Chmelik et al. showed for MOF-74(Co) that brief exposure to ambient (moist) air makes the material impermeable to any guest molecule.  232  Exposure to methanol can reverse this adverse effect.  232  The structural retention upon dehydration also holds for MOF-74(Ni). Although when oxygen is present, crystallinity is irreversibly lost, even at mild regeneration temperatures.  233  The porosity of MOF-74(Mg) is lost irreversibly when exposed to humid air.  105  In any case though, high temperatures are required to desorb the water, explaining why Furukawa et al. observed a decrease in adsorption in repeated cycles, employing only mild intermittent regeneration.  212  The preceding again indicates that making conclusive remarks about hydrothermal stability is not always straightforward and paradoxical, or contradictory remarks may be reported in different sources. Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) are a subclass of MOFs known for excellent stability.  234  ZIFs consist of imidazolate ligands that connect individual metal ions in a three-dimensional fashion. The inherent absence of metaloxide or hydroxide groups on the inorganic cluster and the aromatic nature of imidazoles make that ZIFs are inherently hydrophobic without added functionality. Most notably, hydrophobic ZIF-8 can become increasingly hydrophilic by exchanging methyl-imidazolate ligands with methyl-triazolate ligands.  235  After full ligand exchange, the material (named MAF-7) has favorable water adsorption characteristics for application in AHP/ACs, albeit that the hysteresis loop does not fully close anymore.  235  As upon this functionalization only one carbon-atom in the aromatic ring of the ligand is replaced by a nitrogen-atom, no reduction in porosity and thus in adsorption capacity (based on volume) occurs, contrary to functionalization attempts performed for most dicarboxylic acid-based MOFs, where bulky functional groups often reduce the available volume for adsorption. In addition, MAF-7(Zn) has been successfully directly grown on structured zinc oxide, without the addition of any solvent, which is very beneficial for application.  236  On top of that, these materials are relatively robust, as it takes multiple days to degrade these materials in boiling water.  237  As mentioned, hydrothermally unstable MOFs can be modified to be more tolerant toward water (vapor). This has been demonstrated by the group of Walton in great detail for pillared MOFs.  110, 152, 157, 231, 238  Pillared MOFs consist of metalions, so far all bivalent, linked together in two dimensions by one ligand and in the third dimension by a second ligand (pillars). A notable example is the DMOF 239 (or DABCO-MOF) series. Without or with a variety of functional groups on the terephthalate moiety (NH 2 -, Br-, Cl-, OH-, NO 2 -, naphthyl-), the DMOF structure is irreversibly lost upon water adsorption.  110, 152, 231  However, when all vacant positions on the terephthalic acid ligand are replaced with methyl-groups, the structure, named DMOF-TM2, is stable toward water for at least three adsorption cycles. 110 Surprisingly, the material is not fully water repellent and adsorption of water in DMOF-TM2 contains a distinct step (α = 0.26) with sufficient loading for application. The material becomes increasingly hydrophobic when including cobalt (α = 0.35), nickel (α = 0.45), or copper (α = 0.55) ions.  157  Additionally, due to the flexible nature of these frameworks, there seem to be some hysteretic effects that are unfavorable for application. 157 Also, for other pillared MOFs, methylation may increase stability (see Table  1 ), but these materials are either too hydrophobic in nature or show low adsorption capacity.  157, 238  Of all copper-based MOFs, Cu-BTC (or HKUST-1) shows highest water capacity.  96, 156, 203, 230, 231  Unfortunately, Cu-BTC and likely other MOFs containing Cu-paddlewheel clusters are only moderately stable when subjected to water.  156, 230, 231  On notable exception is Cu 2 (dmcapz) 2 , which seems to undergo a reversible structural transition upon water adsorption.  240  Unfortunately, for application, the benefits of the stepwise adsorption branch are nullified by a strong, not fully closing, hysteresis loop, due to this structural transition.  240   Zn-based MOFs often exhibit limited hydrothermal stability. There are, however, notable exceptions. Zn-trimesate, containing zinc-oxide clusters, shows an exceptionally high hydrothermal.  241  Even after 40 adsorption-desorption cycles, its water adsorption capacity, on itself somewhat low for application (20% wt), is retained. 241 MFU-4(Zn), containing a rare Zn 5 Cl 4 -based cluster, exhibits a peculiar linear water adsorption isotherm with a capacity of 0.55 g H2O g -1 (α = 0.25) and no loss in capacity after water adsorption.  242  Although a linear isotherm, as rare as it is, is better suited for application in AHP/ACs than Type-I isotherms, a stepwise isotherm is still preferred. Zn 4 O(dmcapz) 3 , which has the same cluster as water-unstable IRMOFs, shows sufficient adsorption capacity and remarkable water stability, due to the dmcapz-ligand.  243  However, the material is too hydrophobic for application. Another method of increasing stability of MOFs with the Zn 4 O-cluster is by fluorination of the organic ligand.  244  Unfortunately, the reported Zn-based MOF is extremely hydrophobic (α = 0.9), due to addition of these fluorinegroups.  244  The amino-acid derived Zn-based MOFs reported by Kundu et al. were found to be stable as well,  245, 246  but also their adsorption characteristics are not very appealing for AHP/ ACs.

Chemical Reviews
ISE-1(Ni), arguably the first MOF specifically designed for application in AHP/ACs, has only a marginal water capacity (0.18 g g -1 ) and is seemingly devoid of stepwise uptake.  247  It is however stable upon repeated adsorption cycles.  102  A set of isostructural Ni-based MOFs with increasing ligand length has  a Maximum capacity (q max ), relative pressure for which capacity is 50% of q max (α), pore volume (V p ), enthalpy of adsorption (Δ ads H), and remarks about stability are included where possible. b p/p o for which q = 0.5q max , measured at 298 K unless otherwise mentioned. been reported by  Padial et al. 248  Unfortunately, this set of materials shows a clear trade-off between capacity and hydrophobicity, as the increase in capacity coincides with an increase in α. They are seemingly stable though, as was the case for ISE-1(Ni). The remaining MOFs in the miscellaneous section of Table  1  either are too hydrophobic or hydrophilic or show a low capacity. material ligand α b [-] q max [g g -1 ] -Δ ads H [kJ mol -1 ] V p c [cm 3 g -1 ] As a general observation, for MOFs of which water adsorption is reported in multiple literature sources, both α and uptake capacity seem to vary. The latter is mostly due to variation in material quality. The former however can be caused by a variety of reasons; for example, measurements are conducted differently (static, under flow, etc.). In some isotherms, condensation effects start occurring already at p/p o ≈ 0.9, implying that the p o value might be inaccurate. Furthermore, as water adsorption measurements are generally relatively time-consuming, there is a large fluctuation in the concentration of data points in reported isotherms, making that stepwise uptake is shown in various resolutions. Also, minor shifts in α are to be expected as a function of measurement temperature (eq 21). In addition, as indicated by Ghosh et al., also a shift in uptake might be observed due to defects.  85  One should take this into consideration when browsing through the different entries of the same structure in Table  1 .

Methanol Adsorption (Table 2)
Not surprisingly, for MIL-101(Cr), one of the most reported MOFs in literature, methanol adsorption has been investigated.  189  The isotherm is nearly linear and the high saturation capacity is reached at p/p o ≈ 0.4, making the material suitable for application in AHP/ACs. 189 MIL-53(Cr) shows a clear step in the desired relative pressure range.  219  Unfortunately, this step comprises only part of the (moderate) adsorption capacity. Furthermore, the enthalpy of adsorption is relatively high as compared to the enthalpy of evaporation of methanol. Both hydrophobic ZIF-8 and ZIF-71 and hydrophilic ZIF-91 show decent uptake of methanol in a narrow relative pressure range,  272  indicating that water adsorption is more sensitive to the interior decoration of the pore space than is the case for alcohols. By exchanging methyl-imidazolate ligands (ZIF-8 or MAF-4(Zn)) with methyl-triazolate ligands to form (MAF-7(Zn)), the step in adsorption can be tuned to lower relative pressures, 237 as was shown for water adsorption.  235  Cu-BTC displays a fair capacity for methanol, but adsorption occurs at low relative pressures, making regeneration energetically costly.  96  Cu 2 (dmcapz) 2 shows a very favorable step in adsorption, making it potentially interesting for application.  240  However, this steep adsorption step is due to a structural transition, and requires high temperatures to be reversed. Therefore, under isothermal conditions, hysteresis during desorption does not fully close. Cu 4 O(OH) 2 (Me 2 trzpba) 4 also shows high methanol capacity but suffers from a large desorption hysteresis as well. DABCO (TED)-based MOF Zn(BDC)(TED) 0.5 , notoriously unstable in the presence of water, shows a good uptake of methanol at relevant relative pressures and only has a mild hysteresis.  290  Enthalpy of adsorption is in the same order of magnitude as MIL-53(Cr). The instability though might be the reason why others indicate inferior adsorption properties for seemingly the same compound.  291  Most of the remaining MOFs in Table  2  suffer from either unfavorable adsorption behavior or unsatisfactory capacity.

Ethanol Adsorption (Table 3)
MIL-101(Cr) shows adsorption behavior that can be described as the combination of two Type I isotherms, one at low and  a Maximum capacity (q max ), relative pressure for which capacity is 50% of q max (α), pore volume (V p ), enthalpy of adsorption (Δ ads H), and remarks about stability are included where possible. b p/p o for which q = 0.5q max , measured at 298 K unless otherwise mentioned. one at intermediate relative pressure, and an outstanding capacity. 302 Furthermore, it has been shown that for at least 20 adsorption/desorption cycles of ethanol, MIL-101(Cr) remains stable.  302  The Type I isotherm at low relative pressure unfortunately means that relatively high desorption temperature is required for full regeneration. MIL-100(Cr) shows uptake at lower relative pressures, at the expense of lower capacity.  302  Ethanol adsorption in MIL-53(Cr) shows very similar isotherm shape and step location, as was found for methanol.  219  As was the case for methanol, the enthalpy of adsorption for ethanol is somewhat high, as compared to the enthalpy of evaporation for this structure.  219  Bipyridyl-based UiO exhibits high ethanol capacity, albeit at a low relative pressure (α = 0.05).  303  The structure was deemed stable, as after ethanol adsorption and after soaking the material in water or methanol the structure does not show degradation in the Xray diffraction pattern.  303  This is in shear contrast with DeCoste et al., who reported that the bipyridyl-moiety makes the resulting UiO-derivative instable toward methanol exposure.  104  The aforementioned family of ZIFs showed a steep uptake at somewhat lower relative pressures than for methanol.  272  The same was found for ethanol adsorption in Cu-BTC,  96  but, like for methanol, the uptake is located at undesirably low relative pressures. Zn(BDC)(TED) 0.5 , as was found for methanol, shows a step-like uptake of ethanol with a good capacity.  290  Most of the remaining MOFs in Table  3  suffer from either unfavorable adsorption behavior or unsatisfactory capacity. material ligand α b [-] q max [g g -1 ] -Δ ads H [kJ mol -1 ] V p c [cm

Ammonia Adsorption (Table 4)
The availability of ammonia adsorption data in the literature, see Table  4 , is quite limited, and the research scope for this adsorptive is entirely different. Investigations are tailored toward the capture of toxic gaseous compounds,  [305] [306] [307]  explaining why in many cases only (trace) ammonia adsorption capacities from breakthrough experiments, where NH 3 is diluted to concentrations down to 1000 mg m -3 , 305,306,308 are  a Maximum capacity (q max ), relative pressure for which capacity is 50% of q max (α), pore volume (V p ), enthalpy of adsorption (Δ ads H), and remarks about stability are included where possible. b p/p o for which q = 0.5q max , measured at 298 K unless noted otherwise.  material ligand α b [-] q max [g g -1 ] -Δ ads H [kJ mol -1 ] V p c [cm 3 g -1 ]

Chemical Reviews
Review presented. It is clear that, from these data, assessment for AHP/ ACs would be difficult. MOF stability toward ammonia seems to be at least a similar issue as was found for water. All Zn 4 Ocluster based MOFs under study seem to degrade completely upon contact with ammonia.  309, 310  Also, HKUST-1 seems to completely degrade during NH 3 adsorption.  311  Although, according to Borfecchia et al., NH 3 adsorption on dry HKUST-1 only results in strong chemisorption of ammonia on Cu(II), distorting the framework, but without loss of crystallinity.  312  Only in the simultaneous presence of water and ammonia should a strong detrimental effect on the structure be observed.  312  In contrast, MIL-100(Fe) is more stable toward ammonia, as after breakthrough experiments with ammonia under dry or humid conditions, no significant loss in porosity can be observed from breakthrough experiments, employing MOF-carbon composites.  313  UiO-66(Zr), postfunctionalized with various combinations of exotic side groups, also seems to show reversible adsorption (up to p/p o ≈ 0.12), indicated by the apparent closed hysteresis loop.  314  This actually indicates another issue with the assessment of ammonia for AHP/ACs. As many standard setups can only measure up to roughly 1.2 bar, yielding a relative pressure of ∼0.12 at room temperature, only a small part of the ammonia isotherm is commonly reported. This is especially troublesome as the application window is 0.15 < p/p o < 0.55 for ammonia (section 1). Therefore, the volume that could be filled with ammonia (liquid density of ammonia is ∼0.77 g mL -1 at STP) is significantly smaller than the reported pore volume in all entries of Table  4 . Therefore, in this study, ammonia is disregarded as potential working fluid, and future measurements should be conducted, for NH 3 -tolerant MOFs, at higher relative pressures (e.g., by decreasing measurement temperature).

MOF EVALUATION AND SELECTION
When regarding water as adsorptive, stability is more of an issue than for alcohols. Nonetheless, a vast amount of information on water adsorption in MOFs is available, and a lot of attention has been devoted to the development of MOFs for AHP/AC applications with water as working fluid (arguably the first being ISE-1(Ni) developed by  Henninger et al. 247  ). The interest is also reflected in a number of patent applications. Chang and co-workers were among the first to have patents granted for the application of MIL-100(Fe) and MIL-101(Fe) in AHP/ACs.  [316] [317] [318] [319] [320]  Others have filed patents as well, although often specific structures are not targeted, but instead the aim is to cover a broad range of different possible structures.  [321] [322] [323] [324] [325]  Not surprisingly, thus there are indeed MOFs that have been shown to be (relatively) stable under cyclic water adsorption. In order of increasing stability, these are Al-fumarate, 227 MIL-100(Fe),  40  MIL-101(Cr), 250 and CAU-10(Al)-H.  225  It is noted here that of these MOFs both Al-fumarate and MIL-100(Fe) are commercialized by BASF and Sigma-Aldrich and are produced on a large scale already.  [326] [327] [328]  In addition, there are MOFs that, at least, have not been shown to be unstable under several adsorption cycles. Of these, DMOF-TM2(Zn), 110 MOF-801(Zr), 212 and MOF-841(Zr)  212  have interesting adsorption behavior. The former, due to the absence of information on enthalpy of adsorption, will not be considered further in section 6 of this work. The latter two, MOF-801(Zr) and MOF-841(Zr), comprise the same Zr-cluster as UiO-66 212 that was demonstrated to degrade under cyclic operations.  22  Whether this might also hold for MOF-801(Zr) and MOF-841(Zr), which contain the same cluster, is unclear, and for the time being, these structures are assumed stable for the further purposes of this work. Adsorption isotherms of these interesting materials, selected for the performance assessment in section 6, are shown in Figure  6 . Methanol (Table  2 ) or ethanol (Table  3 ) adsorption in MOFs, when compared to that of water, is far less reported. Where for previous generations of MOFs, methanol was the polar adsorptive of choice, in more recent works water seems to be preferred. This pivot in adsorption, loosely coinciding with the highly appreciated work of  Kusgens et al. in 2009, 203  makes that for a few MOF structures, the adsorption behavior is analyzed of both working fluids. Furthermore, information on stability is limited, and will be assumed less of an issue than for water or ammonia. Two structures were found to have at least moderate suitability for application in AHP/ACs when alcohols are employed as working fluid, MIL-53(Cr)  219  and Zn(BDC)-(TED) 0.5 , 290 for both of which the adsorption enthalpy was reported as a function of loading. The latter is a must for detailed performance characterization (section 6.4). The seemingly most favorable isotherm for methanol is that of ZIF-71(Zn), although no information about adsorption enthalpy or desorption hysteresis could be retrieved.  272  The isotherms of these materials, selected for the performance assessment in section 6, are shown in Figure  7 . Both MIL-53(Cr) and Zn(BDC)(TED) 0.5 show undesirable hysteresis, unexpected on the basis of pore size alone. As can be seen from Table  5 , the critical diameter is significantly higher than the pore sizes of these materials. This is likely caused by the flexibility of these frameworks. It is often observed that "breathing" behavior induced by adsorption of various guest molecules coincides with hysteresis in microporous materials,  unexpected on the basis of pore size alone. For most materials, of which alcohol and water adsorption is known, α decreases for adsorptives in the order of water > methanol > ethanol, in line with increased size, and thus confinement effect, when strong flexibility effects and enhanced hydrophobicity are absent. Compare, for example, the locations of the step in uptake for water, methanol, and ethanol of MIL-100(Cr) (α = 0.45-0.48, α = 0.25, and α = 0.18, respectively). This means that for alcohols, MOFs with Figure  6 . Water adsorption isotherms (298 K) for CAU-10(Al)-H ( ■ ), MIL-100(Fe) (red •), MIL-101(Cr) (blue ▲), Al-fumarate (purple left-facing ▲), MOF-841(Zr) (pink ▼), and MOF-801(Zr) (green ◆ ). From own exp.  223  and lit. sources.  40, 80, 212, 227  Chemical Reviews larger pore sizes could be used than for water. MIL-101, which has a large portion of uptake for water at an undesirably high α, has the uptake of methanol almost completely at α < 0.3. Advantageously, and in line with values for D c (Table  5 ), there is no notable hysteresis loop for methanol in MIL-101(Cr). Unfortunately, due to the lower polarity of methanol, the shape of the initial part of the isotherm (α < 0.1) has become IUPAC Type I,  360, 361  where for water this part (α < 0.3) was more like Type III/V.  360, 361  This means that either a high desorption temperature should be exerted for full regeneration, or the working capacity will be lowered as compared to the adsorption capacity. The number of viable MOF-alcohol working pairs is low in comparison to water-based working pairs, for which there are interesting candidates available already. However, the feasibility to employ larger pore sizes without introducing hysteresis and the decreased issues with stability can trigger further investigation. For the time being, however, the current assessment is somewhat limited due to the lack of information on uptake behavior and adsorption enthalpies. The reader is reminded last that, for ammonia adsorption, no suitable candidates were found at all.

PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT
MOFs with suitable adsorption characteristics and devoid of instability issues were identified in previous sections. In the following sections, MOF performance will be compared to selected benchmark materials to further elucidate the possible benefits of using MOFs for the application at hand. To do so, a more detailed understanding of an ideal heat pump cycle is required (section 6.2). On the basis of this cycle, the governing equations of the thermodynamic model can subsequently be described (section 6.3). This model requires some thermodynamic properties as input. Their determination and/or estimation is briefly mentioned (section 6.4), followed by a detailed discussion of the results (section 6.5).

Selected Working Pairs
The MOFs that show promise for application in adsorptiondriven allocation of heat and cold are listed in Table  6 . Of these  a Pore structure, window and pore size, crystal density, loading averaged enthalpy of adsorption, and saturation volume adsorbed, per volume of adsorbent, are indicated where meaningful. b As reported, unless noted otherwise. c Crystal density, determined from crystallographic structure, unless noted otherwise. d Average enthalpy of adsorption, as calculated with eq 24, over the loading range for which the enthalpy (or else isosteric heat) of adsorption is determined. Value is for water as adsorptive, unless noted otherwise. e Saturation capacity (in g g -1 ) is converted using the crystal density of the material, where possible, and liquid density of the working fluid f The reported isosteric heat of adsorption at higher loadings 227 becomes lower than the evaporation enthalpy of water, yielding this unphysically low average. g AQSOA-Z01 is a partially Fe-exchanged AlPO 4 -5 material. However, the fraction of iron is not accurately reported and is thus neglected in the density calculations. bd is the bulk density. rd is the real density. np is the narrow pore configuration. lp is the large pore configuration. N 2 was derived from the pore-size distribution of the N 2 physisorption isotherm (at 77 K). Chemical Reviews materials, pore and window size and crystallographic density are indicated when known. Most MOFs are combined with water as working fluid. Only MIL-53(Cr) and Zn(BDC)-(DABCO) 0.5 are suitable candidates when methanol is employed. The list is completed with selected or benchmark materials. For water as working fluid, these are commercially applied AQSOA-Z01  46  and -Z05,  45  both AlPO 4 -5-based zeotypes (Z01 is partially iron-exchanged) with the AFI-structure, AQSOA-Z02, based on the SAPO-34 zeotype (CHA-structure), and silica gel (Grade 40, Davidson).  362  For methanol as working fluid, research in academia has focused primarily on various activated carbons.  [363] [364] [365] [366] [367] [368] [369]  Here, G32-H has been selected as reference, as it shows a good working capacity under varying working conditions and has been properly characterized for AHP/ACs. 364 These materials will be subjected in this section to a thorough thermodynamicsbased comparison to critically assess the feasibility of MOFs. In addition to the structural parameters in Table  6 , the loadingaveraged enthalpy change upon adsorption has also been listed, as this is a proper comparator for the adsorption energetics of different working pairs (eq 24), in addition to the volumetric saturation capacity (W sat ). From Table  6 , it can be concluded that the selected MOFs have a greater variety in pore sizes than the benchmark materials. Furthermore, in general, the average enthalpy of adsorption is lower for MOFs than for benchmark materials (for water). This is a primary indication that employing MOFs might energetically be more efficient as less energy is required for regeneration (desorption, section 6.3). Additionally, it appears that larger pore sizes lead to lower average enthalpies of adsorption for water as working fluid. This can be easily rationalized. For a larger pore size, there are larger voids within a structure. This in turn means that, on average, water molecules interact more with other water molecules than with the pore surface for these larger pores. This results in an enthalpy of adsorption that is closer to the evaporation enthalpy of water. Last, the crystallographic density of MOFs is lower than benchmark zeotypes, especially for large pore size structures. This is important in comparing different materials. It is customary to present adsorption capacities of porous materials per unit mass of material, but this results in a skewed evaluation, as the volume of material required to trap a certain amount of working fluid is a more important parameter. Hence, the crystallographic density is used to convert to amount adsorbed on a volumetric basis as has been done for the water isotherms of selected MOFs (Figure  6 ) in Figure  8 . Clearly, the adsorption capacities of interesting materials vary less in magnitude when compared per unit volume of material. We advocate here the latter basis of comparison (per unit volume), as the volume of adsorbent is important in determining the size of an AHP/AC. The main drawback of AHP/ACs traditionally is the comparably large size of these devices, 376 and thus materials performing better per unit volume are thus highly desired. This includes household (domestic) or mobile applications, where space is only limited available. This is comparable to H 2 storage, for which the U.S. Department of Energy has formulated storage capacity targets per unit volume.  [377] [378] [379]  This is especially relevant as MOFs and zeolites differ significantly in (crystallographic) density (see Table  6 ). In fact, one could argue that the bulk density of the material would be more appropriate to perform this conversion than the density of a (perfect) crystal. The bulk density, ρ b , depends on the bulk porosity, ε b , of the sample under investigation: ρ ρ ε = - (1 ) b c b (2) Note that in eq 2, it is tacitly assumed that the particle density (excluding extra-particle voids, ρ p ) is equal to that of the perfect crystal (ρ c ), which is adequate if the particles are sufficiently crystalline. Often, if not always, both the particle and the bulk density are omitted for the materials reported in section 4 of this Review. In addition, these measurements are almost exclusively performed on powder samples, of which bulk densities are likely to be different from materials applied in AHP/AC. Thus, even if the bulk density is known, the porosity is expected to be different than in actual application. With the above assumption, one could in principle estimate the bulk density with knowledge of ε b (see eq 2). However, in actual devices, often either coatings or pellets are attached to heat exchanger surfaces and additionally when ε b is be decreased (i) bulk capacity is increased, (ii) mass transport is hampered, (iii) heat transfer is enhanced, and (iv) the actual cycle is less ideal. 380 Thus, ε b is both morphology-dependent and a possible tuning parameter for mass and heat transfer (which are not well-known for the MOFs discussed in this work), and it is thus very difficult to give this quantity a priori a representative value for AHP/ACs. Hence, it is clearly best to compare working capacities per volume of material (ε b = 0) in the remainder of this work.

Heat Pump Cycle
An adsorption-driven heat pump cycle consists of four steps, two for adsorption and two for desorption. These steps are briefly explained with the aid of the cycle diagram (Figure  9 ). In this diagram, the x-axis indeed is shown as -1/T, which is typically done in the literature  30, 52, [381] [382] [383] [384] [385]  to ensure both that the isosteric lines are straight (ln p versus 1/T ensures this) and that the lowest temperature is at the left end of the figure. Starting from a fully saturated adsorbent (point I), these four steps are consecutively. Isosteric heating (I-II): The adsorbent is fully saturated (W max ) and requires regeneration or desorption of working fluid. Before working fluid can be released to the condenser, 

Chemical Reviews
pressure needs to be increased from p ev to p con . This is realized by heating the adsorbent from T 1 to T 2 . During this stage, ideally, no working fluid is desorbed and the adsorbent vessel is disconnected from both the condenser and the evaporator. Isobaric desorption (II-III): Adsorbent heating is continued. Because the adsorbent vessel is connected to the condenser in this stage, working fluid is allowed to desorb and no further pressure increase occurs. This process is stopped when desorption temperature (T des ) is reached and the adsorbent loading is minimal (W min ). The desorbed working fluid (W max -W min ) is condensed, releasing heat to the environment in the condenser (Q con , Figure  1 ). Isosteric cooling (III-IV): The adsorbent is regenerated and can be used for adsorption. However, first the pressure needs to be reduced to p ev by cooling the vessel from T des to T 3 , again isosterically and disconnected from condenser and evaporator. Isobaric adsorption (IV-I): Cooling is continued. Because the adsorbent vessel is connected to the evaporator in this stage, working fluid is allowed to adsorb and no further pressure decrease occurs. This process is stopped when T 1 is reached and the adsorbent loading is maximal again (W max ). The adsorbed working fluid (W max -W min ) has taken up energy from the environment at a low temperature in the evaporator by its evaporation (Q ev , Figure  1 ), while releasing heat in the adsorber at an intermediate temperature level upon adsorption. The energy required for trajectories I-II and II-III combined is the energy required for desorption (Q des , Figure  1 ), while the energy released during trajectories III-IV and IV-I is equal to the adsorption energy (Q ads , Figure  1 ). For practical reasons, in most cases it is chosen to equate T 1 , often called (minimum) temperature of adsorption (T ads ), to the condenser temperature, T con .  52, 386  The remaining temperatures and pressures used in this cycle cannot be all independently chosen. The condenser and evaporator pressure are inherently linked to their respective temperatures by the vapor-liquid equilibrium of the selected working fluid. For a given working pair, T 2 is related to T con via the maximum loading isostere (W max ). This means that, for a given working pair, T 2 is fixed by choosing the condenser temperature (and pressure). T 3 and T des are related through the minimum loading isostere (W min ), and T 3 is fixed when the evaporator temperature is selected. In summary, for a given working pair, the operational conditions are fully fixed when evaporator, condenser, and (maximum) desorption temperature are chosen. Generally speaking, one can use this cycle for two purposes, heating or cooling, as schematically indicated in Figure  10 . When using the cycle for heating, energy at a high temperature (used for regeneration of the sorbent) is transferred to an intermediate temperature (via condensation and adsorption). The energy taken up from the environment at ambient (low) temperature (required for evaporation) is also released at the intermediate temperature. The required energy at the ambient (low) temperature for evaporation can in principle be employed without effort, and this is the reason that a heat pump has a higher energy efficiency in transferring energy from high to medium temperatures than a simple heat exchanger. For cooling purposes, the energy taken up by evaporation desirably occurs at a low temperature. This is why the temperature of the low level is subambient for cooling processes. The energy at high temperature, used for regeneration of the cycle, is used as input energy to generate this cooling effect. The energy rejected at the intermediate temperature level is not effectively used when cooling using this cycle. The temperatures at which the evaporator and condenser are operated depend on the actual application. The employed operational temperatures used to assess the performance of MOFs in comparison to selected benchmark materials, for different applications, are listed in Table  7  and are comparable to those used by others.  52, 55, 364, 381, 382, [385] [386] [387]  Heat pumps are considered here as a single application; cooling is subdivided intp three different applications. Refrigeration (RF)-I could be used for air-conditioning purposes, whereas RF-II could be used for an actual refrigerator. Both are included (section 6.5) to highlight the effect of the minor differences in the evaporation temperature on material comparison. The desorption temperature can be independently varied to find an optimum between working capacity and energy efficiency, as will be discussed in detail (section 6.5). On a more critical note, one might argue that the evaporation temperature of the heat pump condition is at the   

Chemical Reviews
high end of the spectrum of commonly applied temperatures (270-288 K mostly). The choice for this somewhat high temperature (288 K) was made as most MOFs have an isotherm (Figure  6 ) with a step in adsorption such that the working capacity at lower temperatures will likely become negligible, as will become clear from the results (MOF-801(Zr) is the exception). This temperature however is by no means practically unfeasible.

Thermodynamic Model
Here, the necessary equations to describe the heat pump cycle from a thermodynamic perspective are presented, starting with the coefficient of performance (COP), which is the commonly adopted parameter to describe energetic efficiency.  7, 384, 386  The COP is defined as the useful energy output divided by the energy required as input. For heating, this becomes = - + Q Q Q COP ( ) H con ads regen (3) Here, Q con is the energy released during condensation, and Q ads the energy released during the adsorption stage; both have a negative value as energy is rejected from the adsorption cycle. Q regen is the energy required for regeneration of adsorbent, a positive quantity as energy is added to the system. For cooling, the coefficient of performance becomes = Q Q COP C ev regen (4) Here, Q ev is the energy taken up in the evaporator. The energy taken up by the evaporator and released by the condenser can be calculated with knowledge of the enthalpy of evaporation, Δ vap H (Figure  3 ), by respectively: ρ = - Δ Δ Q H T m W M ( ) ev vap ev liq wf sorbent w (5) ρ = Δ Δ Q H T m W M ( ) con vap con liq wf sorbent w (6) Here, m sorbent is the amount of adsorbent used in the adsorption cycle. From here, this quantity is omitted making that the quantities of energy, Q i , are defined per unit of mass of the adsorbent used. ΔW is the working capacity, defined as the difference in working fluid between the maximum and minimum isosteres (W max -W min , see Figure  9 ). Note that because of the limited temperature difference between T e and T con , Q ev and Q con are almost equal in magnitude but opposite in sign. The calculation of the energy required during the regeneration is more tedious as it comprises both isosteric heating (I-II) and isobaric desorption (II-III).  386  The energy required for isosteric heating can be determined with 386 Here, c p wf is the heat capacity of the chosen working fluid and c p effective is the effective heat capacity of the adsorbent (sorbent) and heat exchanger (hex). In fact, the heat exchanger area (∼mass) can be increased to increase heat transfer, at the cost of thermodynamic efficiency, and can thus be an important tuning parameter. As the heat and mass transport properties of MOFs are scarcely known to best of our knowledge, this tuning cannot be performed in reality. Hence, for a comparison based on intrinsic MOF properties, the mass of heat exchanger is assumed zero in the efficiency calculations, yielding thus for the bulk of this work: 386 ∫ ∫ ρ = + - Q c T T W c T T ( ) d ( ) d = c T c T ( ) ( ) p p effective sorbent (8)   Note that the effect of heat exchanger mass on the effective heat capacity is envisaged in eq 25 and Figure  15 . The energy required for isobaric desorption is determined with 386 Q sorption is the energy released during adsorption of the working fluid and can be calculated with ∫ ∫ ρ = + + - - Q c T T W W c T Q ( ) d 2 ∫ ρ = Δ Q M H W W 1 ( ) d W W sorption w liq wf ads min max (10)   Here, M w is the molar mass of the working fluid and Δ ads H the enthalpy of adsorption, which often has a significant dependence on loading (W). The estimation of Δ ads H will be discussed in more detail later in this Review. Finally, combining the energy required for isosteric heating and isobaric desorption yields the total energy required for regeneration: = + - - Q Q Q regen I II II III (11) The energy gained during the adsorption stage is a combination of the energy gained during isosteric cooling (Q III-IV ) and isobaric adsorption (Q IV-I ): = + - - Q Q Q ads III IV IV I (12) The relation for the energy rejected during isosteric cooling is similar to that of isosteric heating (eq 7): For isobaric adsorption, in line with eq 9, one could obtain One can observe from the above that the energy required for regeneration (Q regen ) will be very similar in magnitude to the energy gained during adsorption (Q sorption ). Furthermore, as the enthalpy of adsorption should physically be larger in absolute magnitude than the enthalpy of evaporation, Q con will not be larger than Q sorption . This means, for a single adsorption vessel, that ∫ ∫ ρ = + - Q c T T W c T T ( ) d ( ) d ∫ ∫ ρ = + + + - Q c T T W W c T Q ( ) d 2 ≤ ≤ 1 COP 2 H ( 15 ) In fact, for COP H = 1, there is no incentive to use a heat pump at all, and a simple heat exchanger should be utilized. Applying similar logic (Q ev ≤ Q regen ), one can conclude for cooling purposes that In fact, when using multiple adsorption beds, one could use parts of the energy released during adsorption of one bed for partial regeneration of another bed.  52, 386, 388, 389  Although this energy recovery might aid in exceeding the posed limits on the coefficient of performance (eqs 15,16) with proper design and operation, it is not taken into account in this work. This simply is because the extent of energy recovery between adsorbers is dependent on system design and can in principle be done for any working pair. Omission of any heat recovery is assumed not to modify the intrinsic material comparison aimed at in this work.

Chemical Reviews


Thermodynamic Properties
The model, as presented (section 6.3) to describe the performance of a given working pair in an adsorption heat pump cycle, requires the knowledge of thermodynamic properties. First, for both working fluids (H 2 O, CH 3 OH), the enthalpy of evaporation and vapor pressure (see Figure  3 ) and heat capacity (Figure  S1 ) are accurately known.  35  For the adsorbent, information on the heat capacity is also required (section 6.4.1). In addition, for each adsorbentworking fluid pair, information is needed on the loading dependence on both temperature and pressure. For this purpose, the concept of characteristic curves is conveniently adopted (section 6.4.2).  289, 386, [390] [391] [392]  Last, information on the enthalpy of adsorption as a function of loading is needed (section 6.4.3). The information required for the adsorbents and adsorbent-working fluid pairs is more tedious to obtain than is the case for pure fluid properties and requires proper explanation. 6.4.1. Adsorbent Heat Capacity. As highlighted above, the heat capacity of the adsorbent is necessary to assess the coefficient of performance in AHP/ACs. Mu and Walton investigated the heat capacity of MOFs in great detail in comparison with zeolites and other materials. Their results (Figure  11 ) indicate that for most of the materials under investigation, one could roughly state that 393 ≤ ≤ ⎡ ⎣ ⎢ ⎤ ⎦ ⎥ c 0.6 1.4 J g K p sorbent (17) Although the materials studied by Mu and Walton do not correspond with those selected in this work, their findings, which are largely in line with the heat capacities reported by  Pirngruber et al., 255  serve as a proper indication for the unknown heat capacities. On the basis of these results, c p sorbent is assumed to be 1 J g -1 K -1 regardless of temperature, except for Al-fumarate (c p sorbent ≈ 1.1 J g -1 K -1 ) 227 and activated carbon (c p sorbent ≈ 0.95 J g -1 K -1 ) 364 for which the specific heat capacity is known. A small sensitivity analysis exercise can be performed, employing a simplified equation of the energy required for regeneration: ρ ≈ Δ - ⟨Δ ⟩Δ Q c T M H W 1 p regen sorbent w liq wf ads (18) With eq 18 one can estimate Q regen for a heat capacity of 1.0 and 1.4 J K -1 g -1 , as will be done for the conditions for which the influence of c p sorbent will be the highest. This means a temperature difference, ΔT, of 75 K, the largest used in the results (section 6.5), and a loading difference, ΔW, of 0.2 g g -1 , the minimal value for which coefficients of performance are presented (Figure  14 ). Using the lowest, still physically sound, average adsorption enthalpy of the materials under investigation for water as working fluid (-45.5 kJ mol -1 for MIL-101(Cr), Table  6 ) indicates that a difference of 0.4 J g -1 K -1 in the used c p sorbent will result roughly only in a 5% change in Q regen . For methanol, using the average adsorption enthalpy of Zn(BDC)(DABCO) 0.5 (-42.8 kJ mol -1 , Table  6 ), the change in Q regen will be roughly 8%. For larger adsorption enthalpies and loading differences and smaller temperature differences, these changes will become even less significant. Furthermore, the neglect of the influence of the working fluid heat capacity in eq 18 for simplicity reasons further indicates that the effect of c p sorbent on the magnitude of Q regen and Q sorption is exaggerated in this analysis and that thus employing a fixed sorbent heat capacity of 1.0 J g -1 K -1 for all adsorbents will not significantly affect the performance comparison of the different materials under investigation. 6.4.2. Characteristic Curve. The amount adsorbed in a porous material at equilibrium is a function of both pressure and temperature. Most often adsorption isotherms are measured for one or more given temperatures. These temperatures are frequently around room temperature (298 K), thus lower than, for example, the temperatures applied for desorption in AHP/ACs. This means that these isotherms, on which the data in sections 4 and 5 are based, cannot directly be used in the adopted model (section 6.3). To circumvent this, the concept of the characteristic curve is adopted.  291, 368, [372] [373] [374]  Central in this theory is the use of the Polanyi adsorption potential,  [402] [403] [404]  which is the molar Gibbs free energy of adsorption with opposite sign, defined as = ⎛ ⎝ ⎜ ⎜ ⎞ ⎠ ⎟ ⎟ A RT p T p ln ( ) o (19) Here, p o is the temperature-dependent vapor pressure of the adsorbate of choice. The amount adsorbed should be expressed as volume occupied by the adsorbed phase. As the density of the adsorbed phase is often not known, the liquid phase density is often used as an approximation: Here, q is the mass adsorbed, W is the volume liquid adsorbed, and ρ liq wf the liquid density of the same adsorbate. If a so-called temperature invariance of W is assumed, all measured adsorption data should collapse onto one single "characteristic curve". In practice, this assumption can easily be verified by performing this transformation for more than one isotherm (or isobar). This results in the fact that for each amount of volume adsorbed, W, there is one value of the adsorption potential, A, and each A-W combination corresponds to an isostere (e.g., W max and W min in Figure  9 ). Computationally, this means that each combination of pressure (p,T) can be converted to a single adsorption potential, A, for which the volume adsorbed W can be determined easily via interpolation of the characteristic curve. For a selection of MOFs and the AQSOA-series, this transformation has been performed, and the resulting curves are shown in Figure  12  (other samples in Figure  S2 ). ρ = W q p T T ( , ) ( ) liq Clearly, for the MOFs shown, Figure  12  (bottom), this "characteristic curve" concept works properly. The same can be said for AQSOA-Z05, Figure  12  (middle). However, for AQSOA-Z01 (Figure  12  (top)), even more for AQSOA-Z02 (Figure  12  (middle)), this concept does not perfectly hold. A clear shift in the curve toward lower adsorption potentials can be observed when temperature is increased. AQSOA-Z02, which is actually SAPO-34, displays a structural contraction upon water adsorption, reducing the unit cell volume roughly 2% at room temperature.  375  This contraction might be different at the elevated temperatures encountered in Figure  12 , which could make hydration less favorable.  407  The fact that the volume adsorbed does not display temperature invariance as a function of adsorption potential makes that simple interpolation of the characteristic curve cannot be executed for AQSOA-Z01 and Z02. As for these materials isotherms are in fact measured at elevated temperatures (up to 373 K), the isotherms could in principle be used directly. To make the temperature span continuous, the isotherms are interpolated for these compounds. The details of this procedure and the effect this has on working capacity and coefficient of performance are displayed in Supporting Information S-3. Last, as was hinted at in section 4 of this Review, the relative pressure to indicate the step in uptake, α, changes as a function of temperature of the isotherm. Using eq 19, one can derive an expression to exactly calculate the shift in α when comparing two isotherms at temperatures T 1 and T 2 , respectively, under the assumption of temperature invariance of W: α α = T T 2 1 / 1 2 (21) Here, α 1 and α 2 are the relative pressures of the step in uptake for isotherms measured at respectively T 1 and T 2 . Clearly, this dependency of α on temperature should be considered when comparing results from different temperatures. 6.4.3. Enthalpy of Adsorption. For MIL-53(Cr) and MIL-101(Cr), Δ ads H(W) is accurately known from calorimetric measurements. For the other structures, calorimetric data are not available, and thus the isosteric enthalpy of adsorption will be used. The isosteric enthalpy of adsorption can be calculated, from adsorption isotherms at two or more different temperatures, using 408 Δ = ∂ ∂ ⎛ ⎝ ⎜ ⎞ ⎠ ⎟ H R p T ln (1/ ) W ads W (22) Using this equation, it is (tacitly) assumed that adsorption is fully reversible (no chemisorption occurs), neither the internal energy of the adsorbent surface nor the adsorbent structure is altered during adsorption, and equilibrium is reached between adsorbent and adsorbate. The isosteric enthalpy of adsorption is reported alongside the isotherms at different temperatures for most adsorbents, while for others this quantity is calculated (all Figure  12 . Characteristic curves determined using eqs 19 and 20, using adsorption isotherms from various literature sources, for AQSOA-Z01water  46,405,406 (top) , AQSOA-Z02-water  47, 405  and AQSOA-Z05water  45, 405  (middle), and MOF-841(Zr)-water, 212 CAU-10(Al)-H, and Zn(BDC) (DABCO) 0.5 -methanol 290 (bottom). are shown in the Supporting Information). It can be noticed that the maximum adsorbed volume for which Δ ads H(W) is known, denoted by W max ΔH , is sometimes smaller than the adsorption capacity in the adsorbent (W max ). In the case when W max > W max ΔH , it is assumed that the enthalpy of adsorption will become equal to that of evaporation, and eq 10 is expanded to include this phenomenon:  ∫ ρ ρ = Δ + - Δ Δ Δ Q M H W W M W W H ( ) d ( ) The same can in principle be applied when W min < W min ΔH , although this situation occurred less frequently in this study. Last, the loading averaged enthalpy of adsorption, as reported in Table  6 , is calculated using the full range of the enthalpy of adsorption as a function of adsorbed volume (from W min ΔH to W max ΔH ): ∫ ⟨Δ ⟩ = Δ - Δ Δ Δ Δ H H W W W W ( ) d W W H H ads ads max min H H min max (24) The loading-dependent enthalpy of adsorption, as used in this work, is shown for all materials under investigation in Figure  S4 .

Results and Discussion
The potential of selected MOFs for application in adsorptiondriven heat pumps and chillers is assessed from a thermodynamic perspective, and compared to commercially used benchmark materials. First, the total energy storage capacity is compared (section 6.5.1), after which the performance is determined for different applications, using the operating conditions as specified in Table  7  (section 6.5.2). Additionally, the concept of temperature lift is used to further explain the potential of MOFs (section 6.5.3). 6.5.1. Capacity. From Table  6  it becomes clear that, per volume of material, most MOFs adsorb a larger volume of working fluid than commercially used sorbents (AQSOAs and silica gel). The activated carbon-methanol pair, however, even supersedes MOFs in volumetric working fluid adsorption, but one should note that the amount of energy for condensation or evaporation depends on the enthalpy of evaporation of the working fluid, which is obviously lower for methanol. The maximum energy that can be released in the condenser per cycle, Q con , is when the full adsorption capacity of each material is used. This total energetic capacity, for fair comparison, is shown in Figure  13 (top) . Please note that the chosen temperature here (298 K) is merely used to obtain a value for the enthalpy of evaporation and the total capacity depicted in Figure  13  is not a function of operating conditions, in contrast to the working capacity (cf., Figures  14 15 16 ). Clearly, the activated carbon-methanol pair has a lower energy capacity, because of the lower enthalpy of evaporation of methanol. Where ∼2.4 kJ ml -1 is released for water, only ∼0.9 kJ ml -1 (both at 298 K) is obtained for methanol. This makes that the activated carbon-methanol pair is somewhere between MOFs and AQSOAs with regards to the volume-specific energy released/taken up. This effect further worsens the MOFmethanol pairs in comparison. Another interesting property to compare is the total amount of energy generated by adsorption, which is calculated using eq 23 from zero to saturation loading for all adsorbent-working pairs. The results are shown in Figure  13  (bottom), both per unit volume and per unit mass. In accordance with the previous discussion, mass-specific Q sorption is generally found larger for MOFs than for benchmark sorbents, and methanol-based working pairs. In comparison, volumetric Q sorption of the AQSOA-series is roughly equal to that of activated carbon-methanol, although Q con has been found larger for the latter. This is because for the AQSOAwater working pairs the ratios of enthalpy of adsorption to evaporation are higher than for most other materials. Although this fact might be beneficial for energy storage, and this will be explored in section 7.1, this will have a negative influence on the coefficient of performance in AHP/ACs, as will be demonstrated. Further, by reporting mass-based adsorptive energy content, the comparison becomes skewed. The high mass-based uptake of MIL-101(Cr), which in fact has the lowest density among compared materials, would show vastly higher values than all other materials if performance would be reported, kWh kg -1 (Figure  13 ). When the results are compared on a volumetric basis, MIL-101(Cr) still exhibits the highest Q sorption , but the difference with other materials is less pronounced. In conclusion, the energy content of MOFs can be larger than that of benchmark sorbents. Whether this potential can be harnessed under practical conditions will be discussed in the following section. 6.5.2. Efficiency Comparison. For heat pump application and refrigeration I and II (conditions in Table  7 ), both the volumetric working capacity, ΔW, and the coefficient of performance (heating for heat pump, cooling for refrigeration I and II) have been determined as a function of desorption temperature, T des . For materials that show suitable uptake under applied conditions, the results are shown in Figure  14 , while for those that do not show suitable uptake, the results are shown in Figure  S5 . In addition, because of limited MOFs that can operate under ice-making conditions (using methanol), results for this application are shown in Figure  S6 . For heat pump conditions, Figure  14  (top), employing water as working fluid, it becomes apparent that AQSOA-Z02 can be operated with lower desorption temperatures than MOF-801(Zr). Above 373 K, ΔW is almost equal for both components (∼0.3 mL mL -1 ), and the same holds for COP H (∼0.7). Activated carbon-methanol shows higher ΔW, especially at elevated desorption temperatures, but because  methanol has a lower evaporation enthalpy, the net condensable/evaporable energy per cycle is lower, as at 393 K activated carbon G32-H still contains methanol. Increasing temperature might still thus improve performance. However, as reported by Hu et al., methanol undergoes thermal decomposition at higher temperatures, and thus increasing temperature over 403 K is not very practical.  409  In comparison, for 366 K ≤ T des ≤ 380 K, Zn(BDC)(DABCO) 0.5 has a larger ΔW and a greater efficiency than activated carbon, both employing methanol. MIL-53(Cr), however, because only part of its methanol capacity is used, shows a lower uptake. In addition, both MOF-methanol pairs show little to no release of working fluid for T des ≥ 370 K, mitigating the need to go to higher desorption temperatures. Because the adsorption potential for the adsorbed (maximum capacity) state is already quite high (A ads = 4.6 kJ mol -1 ), many adsorbents do not contain significant adsorbed working fluid volume, making that a negligible working capacity is obtained regardless of desorption strategy. By decreasing the evaporator temperature further, thus increasing A ads (eq 19), even more structures become useless, as during the adsorption stage the materials are hardly loaded with working fluid.

Chemical Reviews
For refrigeration I, Figure  14  (middle), especially MOF-841(Zr) stands out. Saturation capacity is reached at conveniently low desorption temperatures (T des ≈ 333 K) so that either waste or solar energy can be efficiently utilized. As compared to AQSOA-Z01, which requires a similar desorption temperature, ΔW is almost doubled (0.48 versus 0.26 mL mL -1 ) and its efficiency is higher (COP H of 0.83 and 0.72, respectively). The higher efficiency can be explained by the (average) enthalpy of adsorption, being -50.4 and -56.1 kJ mol -1 for MOF-841(Zr) and AQSOA-Z01, respectively (Figure  6 ). This in turn can be attributed to the higher porosity of the former, as per unit volume less adsorption sites are present, meaning that water interacts more with water in this particular structure than it would in AQSOA-Z01. In contrast thus to the heat pump conditions, for refrigeration I clearly there are MOFs that outperform benchmark materials with respect to both (energetic) capacity and thermodynamic efficiency. This difference can be attributed to the lower adsorption potential of the adsorption stage (A ads = 3.1 kJ mol -1 ) for Refrigeration I, which allows structures with higher α-values to be practically utilized. When higher desorption temperatures can be utilized, also CAU-10(Al)-H (T des ≈ 345 K) or MOF-801(Zr) (T des ≈ 355 K) show higher capacity than, and efficiency similar to, those of benchmark materials AQSOA-Z01 and Z02, respectively. This is of particular interest because the organic ligands used for these materials, isophthalic acid 410 for CAU-10(Al)-H and fumaric acid 411 for MOF-801(Zr), are already produced on an industrial scale. In contrast, 4,4′,4″,4‴-methanetetrayltetrabenzoic acid (MTB), the ligand used to synthesize MOF-841(Zr), is not produced on any commercial scale, to the best of our knowledge. For refrigeration II, Figure  14  (bottom), the lower evaporator temperature (278 K instead of 283 K) or higher adsorption potential of the adsorption stage (A ads = 4.0 instead of 3.1 kJ mol -1 ) makes that MOF-841(Zr) and AQSOA-Z01 can no longer be utilized. CAU-10(Al)-H is under these conditions the best performing adsorbent, followed by MOF-801(Zr) AQSOA-Z02. For ice-making conditions, the discussion can be brief. Activated carbon outperforms the two MOF-methanol working pairs (see Figure  S6 ) over the whole range of desorption temperatures; only for T des ≈ 345 K does Zn(BDC)(DABCO) 0.5 have a capacity similar to that of the activated carbon. So, on the basis of these results, there is no clear incentive to use MOF-methanol working pairs for this specific application. From Figure  14  one can observe that an increase in COP is often observed at lower T des than is the case for ΔW. This can be reasoned by the small effect of the effective heat capacity. The heat capacity of the heat exchange surface is ignored in this evaluation, as this generates better intrinsic adsorbent performance comparison. As the heat capacity of the adsorbent has a small influence (section 6.4.1) on the total energy balance, any nonzero ΔW constitutes already a Q regen (and Q sorption ) with a magnitude in the same order as Q ev /Q con . This yields as a result that directly a coefficient of performance can be observed, while the (volumetric) working capacity might be still negligibly small. This is thus a direct effect of ignoring the heat capacity of the heat conduction surface (see eq 8). The influence of heat exchanger (hex) on effective heat capacity can be written as 386 = + c T c T m m c T ( ) ( ) ( ) p p p effective sorbent hex sorbent hex ( 25 ) The mass of heat exchanger, m hex , is defined relative to the mass of adsorbent used. For lab/pilot-scale AHP/ACs, one frequently observes a m hex /m sorbent ratio between 1 and 4 for benchmark materials,  52, 386, [412] [413] [414] [415] [416]  although values as high as 8 may be observed.  417  As heat-exchangers are commonly composed of either copper, aluminum, or stainless steel, one could rightfully assume that 0.4 < c p hex < 0.9 J g -1 K -1 .  35  This in turn means that roughly speaking 1.4 < c p effective < 10 J g -1 K -1 . To envisage the influence of the effective heat capacity, the coefficient of performance for MOF-841(Zr)-water has been calculated for increasing magnitude of c p effective with the conditions of refrigeration I (Figure  14  (middle)), and shown in Figure  15 . Clearly, when c p effective is increased, the coefficient of performance does not increase at lower T des than ΔW anymore. Furthermore, the COP decreases as relatively more energy is required for heating. The desorption temperature corresponding with the optimum COP c is not significantly influenced by the effective heat capacity. The decrease with higher T des however is stronger for larger c p effective . This is because increasing temperature does not significantly release more working fluid, but energy is nonetheless still required for a further temperature increase. This is obviously more cumbersome when c p effective is higher (more heat exchanger mass is present). The influence of c p effective on COP increases with decreasing ΔW, lower enthalpy of adsorption, and higher T des , obviously. Coming back to the results shown in Figure  14 , more specifically to further elucidate the effect of operational temperatures on performance, the concept of "temperature lift" will be introduced and utilized. 6.5.3. Temperature Lift. The temperature lift during the adsorption half-cycle can be defined as the difference between T con and T ev .  386  During desorption, this is the difference between T des and T con .  386  Here, focus is on the former, which can be interpreted as the temperature gain during adsorption for heat pumps, or the achievable decrease in temperature for cooling purposes. For a condenser temperature of 303 K and a fixed desorption temperature (373 K), the temperature of the evaporator is varied to envisage the effect of temperature lift on the energy withdrawal per volume of adsorbent per cycle. Results for all adsorbents are shown in Figure  16 . For low temperature lifts, ΔT lift ≤ 12 K, MIL-101(Cr) has the highest volumetric energy capacity (∼500 kWh m -3 ). For higher required temperature lifts, 12 ≤ ΔT lift ≤ 20 K, MOF-841(Zr) is the adsorbent of choice (∼350 kWh m -3 ). For higher temperature lifts, CAU-10(Al)-H (20 ≤ ΔT lift ≤ 26 K) or MOF-801(Zr) can be efficiently utilized (∼250 and ∼280 kWh m -3 , respectively). In fact, it seems that CAU-10(Al)-H would have performance similar to that of AQSOA-Z02 over a wide range of temperature lifts. However, CAU-10(Al)-H can be regenerated at a significantly lower desorption temperature (see Figure  14 ) than either AQSOA-Z02 or MOF-801(Zr). To dwell on that, the required desorption temperature increases in order of MIL-101(Cr) < MOF-841(Zr) < CAU-10(Al)-H < AQSOA-ZO2 < MOF-801(Zr) (derived from Figure  14 ), perfectly in line with the maximum achievable temperature lift. The coefficient of performance for cooling purposes also decreases with this maximum achievable temperature lift of each material: MIL-101 (Cr, COP c ≈ 0.89) > MOF-841 (Zr, COP c ≈ 0.79) > CAU-10(Al)-H (COP c ≈ 0.72) > AQSOA-ZO2 (COP c ≈ 0.69) > MOF-801 (Zr, COP c ≈ 0.68). Thus, over a wide range of temperature lifts, MOFs can be more efficiently applied than currently available adsorbents. To allow for efficient heat removal by the evaporator, the immediate surroundings of the evaporator (e.g., the inside of a refrigerator) should have a (slightly) higher temperature, T ev ′. The reverse is true for the surroundings of the condenser, which should be lower than T con (T con ′). The effective temperature lift thus, T ev ′ -T con ′, is lower than that mentioned in the preceding discussion. Allowing thus for efficient heat transfer in condenser and evaporator, this will diminish part of the maximum achievable temperature lift. The above results can be, at least qualitatively, reasoned with the aid of pore size. A larger pore size means that pores are filled at lower adsorption potential, A ads (or higher α), so that the maximum temperature lift is reduced. For the same reason, the material is efficiently regenerated at lower adsorption potential of desorption, A des (or lower desorption temperature). Because of the larger pore volume of structures with larger pores, the volumetric adsorption capacity is also increased (see Figure  8 , Table  6 ), and thus also Q ev per volume of material. Last, because of a larger pore volume, the average adsorption enthalpy is lower, as previously mentioned, making thermodynamic efficiency greater. This discussion is based on MOFwater working pairs, and because water is very sensitive to specific adsorption sites, this rationale cannot be quantified fully with only the pore sizes of different materials. For methanol (or other working fluids), although less data are available, it can be safely assumed that this qualitative rationale also holds. The volumetric energy density for methanol, however, has been found lower in comparison to water as working fluid, because of the lower enthalpy of evaporation. In short, thus, for AHP/ACs, MOFs offer from the thermodynamic perspective a significant improvement of thermodynamic efficiency and released/withdrawn energy per unit volume per cycle for over a wide range of desired temperature lifts. This is because of the large variation of pore sizes and possible tuning of adsorption sites. However, heat and mass transfer, left out of the comparison in this work as this is scarcely investigated for MOFs, are also important for actual application. If the characteristic cycle times for the abovementioned MOFs would be significantly longer than for conventional materials, application would still not be feasible. As the configuration of the employed adsorbent (powder, pellets, granules, or coatings) plays a determining role,  51, 363, [418] [419] [420]  dynamic studies should be performed in conjunction with shaping MOF adsorbents. As with MOFs one has the ability to employ larger pore sizes, one may expect that diffusion inside these materials is faster than more narrow pore zeolites. Unfortunately, as studies on thermal transport of MOFs are mainly limited to water-unstable MOF-5,  [421] [422] [423] [424] [425]  it is difficult to predict a priori whether MOFs might display shorter cycle times for a given configuration. Last, as the COPs reported in this work are based on thermodynamic equilibrium, which essentially means with infinite cycle times, in reality efficiency will be lower than determined here. In fact, there is an optimal cycle time to obtain a maximal power per unit volume (J s -1 m -3 ) where the efficiency is maximal at infinite cycle time.  426  Furthermore, because in an actual adsorption cycle a certain amount of working fluid is required to desorb in the isosteric heating stage to achieve the pressure increase from p ev to p con , the actual working capacity is reduced as compared to the ideal working capacity used in this work, and thus also the coefficient of performance. The magnitude of this decrease can be mitigated by allowing for only a small empty volume in the adsorption vessel.  380, 427  Before concluding this Review with a summary and outlook (section 8), alternative applications in which MOF adsorbents could potentially be employed are briefly discussed. All of these applications utilized water as working fluid.

ALTERNATIVE APPLICATIONS
Adsorption-driven allocation of heat or cold is not the only application based on the reversible ad-and desorption of a working fluid. In this section, two major alternative applications will be discussed briefly, and the potential of applying MOFs in these will be concisely assessed. These are thermochemical energy storage (section 7.1) and open cycle dehumidification for air conditioning (section 7.2).

Thermochemical Energy Storage
As mentioned in section 1, temporary energy storage is required when energy supply and demand are out of phase. Especially thermochemical storage is interesting, as it requires significantly less volume to store the same amount of energy  18, 19  as compared to systems based on latent 20 or sensible energy.  21  Conceptually, sorption-based thermochemical storage follows the same cycle as a heat pump, with the exception that the adsorption and desorption processes are separated by storage time.  386  The relevant energy is comprised by the sorption energy and the latent heat of the sorbent. As during desorption, or charging, the adsorbent is heated, this latent heat could thus also be employed, in theory, during the exothermic adsorption stage for additional energy. However, depending on system insulation and storage time, only a fraction of the sensible heat can be recovered. 386 This contribution will be omitted here, as it constitutes only a small fraction the total energy anyway, and the amount of stored energy will be equated to Q sorption . The amount of storable energy is thus a function of operational conditions, as is the case for AHP/ACs, meaning that the volumetric storage capacity is lower than the values indicated in Figure  13  (bottom). This fact is sometimes forgotten when materials are compared, as mentioned by  Stach et al. 428  Another difference in practical operation is that relatively small temperature lifts of adsorption can be employed, down to ∼10 K,  386, 429, 430  which means (see Figure  16 ) that the potential of MOFs can optimally be employed. For T con = 293 K, an often employed temperature when thermochemical storage is considered,  [430] [431] [432]  and T ev = 283 K, 386 sufficient for residential heating, Q sorption as a function of desorption temperature can be calculated. Results are shown in Figure  17  for the more promising MOFs, based on Figures  13  and 16 , and compared to inorganic salts that in combination with water or NH 3 are commonly employed for energy storage at similar desorption or driving temperatures.  6, 19, 433  Clearly, most of the inorganic salt-fluid combinations exhibit larger volumetric storage density than those of the porous adsorbents. Note that these quantities are based on the pure salt-solvate densities and that these salts are nonporous; some even become liquid upon hydration. Both aspects may induce transport limitations and slow the response time. Embedding these in porous solids is considered,  [442] [443] [444] [445] [446]  decreasing the energy density. Therefore, to calculate an effective (energy) density, a bulk porosity of 50% is often assumed.  19, 431  In Figure  17 , however, this has not been done (MOFs and salt-solvates are employed both with 0% porosity). As MOFs are indeed porous, a lower effective bulk porosity than 0.5 might be used in practice, making that energy densities become more in line with those of inorganic salts. As compared to especially watersalt combinations, MOFs have the advantage that lower desorption temperatures can be used, for low temperature lifts. In addition, some of these salts, MgCl 2 , display significant degradation over a few ad-and desorption cycles. 447 Last, zeolites were not considered in this section, despite investigations for thermal energy storage, because these generally exhibit lower energy densities (110 and 160 kWh m -3 for NaX and LiX, 448 respectively) and often require higher desorption temperatures than the adsorbents presented in Figure  17 .

Open Cycle Air-Conditioning
As was already mentioned (section 1), the great advantage of open system air-conditioning by desiccation  [13] [14] [15] [16]  is that water vapor can be removed directly from the ambient air, whereas the closed devices require cooling of the incoming air to temperatures below the dew point.  17  The concept revolves around the direct adsorption of water vapor from ambient air, an effective way of dehumidification. The solid adsorbent is commonly coated on the internal channels of a rotating wheel, called either a sorption rotor or a desiccant wheel. Devices employing either zeolites, zeotypes, or silica gel are already commercially available.  48, 449, 450  The actual operation of desiccant wheel dehumidification is more complex than the heat pump cycle, and the operating conditions depend on outside climate and season.  13, [451] [452] [453]  Detailed performance MIL-101(Cr) (blue ▲), MOF-841(Zr) (pink ▼), and MOF-801(Zr) (green ◆ ) shown with solid lines. AQSOA-Z02 (⬠) with dashed lines. Inorganic salts, used for comparison, in combination with water (top-shaded ◆ ) for SrBr 2 ,  6, 434, 435  CaCl 2 , 6,436 CaSO 4 ,  433, 437  NaS,  433, 438, 439  MgSO 4 ,  6, 432, 440  MgCl 2 ,  6, 431  and Fe(OH) 2 , 433,437 and in combination with NH 3 (left-shaded ⬢) for NH 4 Cl,  19, 441  NaBr,  19, 441  BaCl 2 ,  19, 441  SrCl 2 ,  19, 441  CaCl 2 ,  19, 441  and MnCl 2 .  19, 441  Chemical Reviews characterization of materials in open cycle desiccation is entirely different from AHP/ACs and is considered out of the scope of this Review. However, desired adsorbent properties are similar to those for AHP/ACs, sufficient stability toward water and suitable adsorptive properties. Additionally, as the adsorbent will be exposed to the ambient, fouling resistance by, for example, microbes should be considered. As a difference, the adsorption uptake is allowed to occur at higher relative α's (or relative humidity, RH) than is the case for heat pumps.  17  So, all AQSOA-materials are used for open cycle dehumidification, while AQZOA-Z05, the material with the highest α, is not used for application in AHP/ACs.  48  This means that MOFs with a high volumetric capacity (e.g., MOF-841, MIL-100, and MIL-101) can in principle be efficiently utilized for this purpose. This has been demonstrated by Seo et  al., who showed that the rate mass uptake (RH = 60%) per unit mass of material, for MIL-101, is far greater than other adsorbents, including SAPO-34 (see Figure  18 ).  249  This also clearly indicates a potential advantage of MOFs in dehumidification applications over commonly used adsorbents. Guo et al. further underlined this potential. They claimed, based on an array of different MOFs in comparison with alumina, their industrial adsorbent of choice for dehumidification, that all MOFs have superior total capacities, and some also display superior breakthrough behavior, and thus faster kinetics.  454  In addition, cyclic regeneration for MOFs can be achieved with significantly less energy (lower T des ), all in line with preceding findings (desiccant, AHP/AC).  454   The potential of MOFs as adsorbents in adsorption-driven allocation of heat and cold has been thoroughly assessed in this Review. The adsorption mechanism of water on MOFs is known. Water initially adsorbs at specific hydrophilic sites (uncoordinated metal sites, OH-groups on inorganic clusters, or functional groups on the organic ligand). Subsequently, additional water clusters around these initially adsorbed water molecules, after which the pores are filled via volume filling (d p < D c ) or capillary condensation (d p > D c ). In silico prediction of water adsorption in MOFs is deemed not yet mature enough for accurate selection of MOF structures. For alcohols the adsorption mechanism is somewhat similar, although the adsorption behavior is often devoid of steep steps in uptake. In this case, in silico prediction seems to work better, as the behavior of methanol is well described by classical force fields.

SUMMARY AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
The stability of MOFs with respect to water has been researched in a plethora of communications. Various factors that (co-)determine the structural stability have been posed, of which the most important are the metal species, its valence, coordination number, and degree of filling of the coordination sphere, and the metal-ligand bond strength. Additionally, structural defects can play an important role on stability. Further, degradation reactions do not always occur in the bulk of the material. In some cases, only an exterior shell is degraded, forming an impervious layer, preserving the bulk of the material. Surface tension of water might also have adverse effects on the stability for MOFs with elongated ligands. Last, MOFs that have been claimed to be stable toward water vapor have been shown to degrade under repeated ad-and desorption cycles. The preceding highlights the complexity of influences on water stability. Nonetheless, there are MOFs that exhibit the level of hydrothermal stability required for application in AHP/ ACs. Of these structures, some show the interesting stepwise water uptake behavior for this target application. These are CAU-10(Al)-H, MIL-100(Fe), MIL-101(Cr), MOF-801(Zr), MOF-841(Zr), and Al-fumarate, of which the performance is thoroughly assessed in section 6 of this Review. Especially CAU-10(Al)-H stands out with respect to stability, as no degradation was observed for over 700 adsorption cycles.  225  For methanol, stability is seemingly less of an issue. However, the list of structures for which methanol adsorption has been investigated (at more than one temperature) is too limited for a proper evaluation. Only the performance of MIL-53(Cr) and Zn(BDC)(DABCO) 0.5 could be assessed. These structures exhibit the desired stepwise uptake of methanol, although this is caused by the structural flexibility of the frameworks, making an undesired hysteresis-loop observed. Last, for ammonia, because of stability issues and subsequent limited adsorption data, no suitable candidate could be identified. Of the available adsorption data, a significant part is used for trace removal, which is characterized by very low partial pressures of working fluid, making the bulk of the retrieved studies of little use for detailed assessment. A thermodynamic model of the ideal adsorption heat pump cycle has been adopted, with the aim to assess the performance of MOFs for adsorption-driven allocation of heat and cold on an accurate and objective manner. Per unit volume, MOFs can in total store more energy, Q sorption , and release more energy per cycle (Q ev /Q con ) when water is the working fluid of choice. Especially the latter is desired for the application at hand. Also, especially for cooling applications, MOFs clearly have been shown to display improved capacity and thermodynamic efficiency. Over a wide range of required temperature lifts for application, MOFs display higher capacity and efficiency than benchmark materials. The specific material that has optimal performance depends on the desired temperature lift. For low temperature lifts, ΔT lift ≤ 12 K, MIL-101(Cr) has the highest energy capacity per unit volume MOF (∼500 kWh m -3 ). For higher required temperature lifts, 12 ≤ ΔT lift ≤ 20 K, MOF-841(Zr) is the adsorbent of choice (∼350 kWh m -3 ). For higher temperature lifts, CAU-10(Al)-H (20 ≤ ΔT lift ≤ 26 K) or MOF-801(Zr) can be efficiently utilized (∼250 and ∼280 kWh m -3 , respectively). The required desorption temperature increases, for the investigated adsorbent-water pairs, in the order: MIL-101(Cr) < MOF-841(Zr) < CAU-10(Al)-H < These trends can be directly related to the material's pore size. A larger pore size means that pores are generally filled at higher α, and thus at lower adsorption potential for adsorption, A ads , meaning that the maximum temperature lift is reduced, but the material is efficiently regenerated at lower adsorption potential for desorption, A des , as well. A larger pore volume leads to an increased volumetric adsorption capacity. Because of a larger pore volume, the average adsorption enthalpy is lower, resulting in a higher thermodynamic efficiency. Furthermore, MOFs have great potential for the efficient direct dehumidification of air for air-conditioning purposes. For energy storage applications, focus should be especially on low desorption temperature applications, as MOF-water pairs are likely to be more competitive in this range. In this Review, however, no better performance with respect to commonly used inorganic salts has been identified in terms of energy storage capacity.

Future Perspectives
The focus of this Review is on the thermodynamic ("static") properties of MOFs in relation to allocation of heat and cold, as these are most abundantly available. For successful application, however, also the dynamics of the MOF-working fluid pair are important. The latter depends heavily on the macroscopic structure of the MOF chosen in the heat exchange application. Furthermore, MOFs are commonly synthesized and characterized on the (sub)gram scale, while actual heat pumps contain adsorbent material in the order of kilograms. To help put things into perspective, seven subsequent stages are defined that will eventually lead to application. Stage 0 -Stability: As the primary requirement, MOFs should be tolerant toward the working fluid of choice. This should be ensured before anything else. Stage 1 -Adsorptive properties: On the basis of primary vapor adsorption measurement(s), the shape of an isotherm can be envisaged. From this the initial feasibility can be assessed. Stage 2 -Thermodynamic efficiency and working capacity: With knowledge of the enthalpy of adsorption, preferably directly from calorimetric measurements or else calculated isosteric enthalpy (from isotherms at more than one temperature) and (crystallographic) density of a material, the efficiency and volumetric (working) capacity can be assessed as has been done extensively in section 6 of this Review. Stage 3 -Shaping of materials: The previous stages have in common that they can be assessed on as-synthesized powders. As dynamics of heat and mass transfer (stage 4) are dependent on the chosen configuration of the employed adsorbent (e.g., pellets, granules, or coatings), shaping is in order. Stage 4 -Heat and mass transfer of shaped materials: On the basis of the morphology chosen in stage 3, the effective heat and mass transfer rates should be determined to assess the dynamics of the MOF-working pair. Stage 5 -Scale-up of synthesis: Previous stages can be performed on the (sub)gram scale. For actual application, the synthesis should be properly scaled up, to allow for large-scale performance testing. Stage 6 -Large-scale evaluation of shaped systems: The performance of a large-scale system should be ensured before commercialization. Additionally, on the basis of the performance and the results of stage 5, an economic evaluation will ultimately determine the feasibility of the MOF-working fluid combination. This classification will help assess at which stage are MOFs combined with the working fluid of choice. Furthermore, guidelines and considerations can be posed for focus of future work. 8.2.1. Ammonia -Stage 0. Very few MOFs, if any, have been convincingly demonstrated to reversibly adsorb significant amounts of ammonia with structural retention. The number of different MOF structures for which this has been examined is far lower than for water. The cause of instability with respect to ammonia has received little attention. It is therefore not clear whether there exists a justifiable expectation for ammonia-stable MOFs. If any desire exists to employ MOF-ammonia working pairs in heat pumps, focus should be on resolving instability of MOFs toward ammonia. 8.2.2. Alcohols -Stage 2. Interesting adsorption properties have been reported for several MOFs with respect to methanol/ethanol, for ZIFs (ZIF-8, -68, -71, and -90), MIL-53(Cr), and Zn(BDC)(DABCO) 0.5 . Of the ZIFs, little to no information on either desorption or enthalpy of adsorption is known, making practical assessment impossible. Of the latter two, the energy capacity turned out to be lower than for water-MOF pairs. Because of the higher vapor pressure of methanol and to a lesser extent ethanol, dynamics might be faster than for water, so a lower energetic capacity does not necessarily exclude a viable application. However, for most conditions, the methanol-MOF pairs exhibited lower coefficients of performance (COP) than methanol-activated carbon. Regarding the to be avoided adsorption-desorption hysteresis, alcohols require larger pore diameters than do water (3.5 nm for methanol, 4.3 nm for ethanol, and 2 nm for water). So, larger pore sizes could be used for MOF-alcohol pairs than for water, and for alcohols focus should be on exploring adsorption on additional MOF structures, especially comprising larger pore size structures to obtain more efficient alcohol-based working pairs. 8.2.3. Water -Stages 3/4. In section 6 of this Review, it has been demonstrated convincingly that water-MOF working pairs exist with higher capacity and thermodynamic efficiency than benchmark sorbents. Shaping of these materials should be focused on, in conjunction with, measurements on heat and mass transfer dynamics. For packed bed systems, heat transfer is often limiting, making coatings an optimal configuration.  51, 418, 455  Most work regarding MOF coatings has focused on the creation of thin films,  [456] [457] [458] [459] [460] [461]  of which the thickness is generally on the submicrometer-scale, orders of magnitude off for target application. However, there are studies focusing on creating thick MOF films (>100 μm), suited for application. These are based on direct crystallization on the surface, without the need for a physical binder material.  223, 227, 228  Furthermore, MAF-4 has been grown directly from and on structured ZnO, 236 and Al-based MOFs have been formed directly on and from structured alumina-supports.  462  These and other  463, 464  examples highlight the potential of direct growth of MOFs on various structured supports. Alternatively, granules or pellets  424, [465] [466] [467] [468]  can be utilized. For benchmark materials AQSOA-Z01,  469, 470  AQSOA-Z02,  [471] [472] [473]  and silica gel,  473, 474  the adsorption dynamics of water have been determined and serve as a good basis for comparison. Although there are few accounts of their large-scale synthesis,  304, 475, 476  MOFs potentially offer advantages, as environmentally benign,  [477] [478] [479] [480]  room temperature,  [481] [482] [483] [484] [485] [486] [487] [488]  and even solvent-free synthesis  [489] [490] [491] [492] [493] [494]  protocols have been developed. In comparison, zeolite and zeotype synthesis often requires relatively expensive sacrificial organic templates,  [495] [496] [497] [498] [499] [500]  as is the case for the synthesis of SAPO-34 (AQSOA-ZO2)  [501] [502] [503]  and AlPO-5 (AQSOA-Z01/Z05).  [504] [505] [506]  In short, MOFs with water as working fluid show improved thermodynamic efficiency and volumetric adsorption capacity in comparison to commercially available benchmark materials for adsorption-driven allocation of heat and cold. MOF potential is further strengthened by the availability of low temperature, environmentally benign, and even solvent-free synthesis protocols and the possibility of synthesizing these materials directly on heat exchanger surfaces. MOFs thus have a bright future for application in adsorption-driven heat pumps and chillers.

Chemical Reviews


ASSOCIATED CONTENT * S Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00059. Additional calculation results, model input, and information about the employed interpolation scheme (for AQSOA-Z01 and -Z02) (PDF) Jorge Gascon (1977)  3,5-di(pyridine-4-yl)benzoic acid L7 5-(4-pyridyl)-isophthalic acid Me 2 trzpba 4- (3,5-dimethyl-4H-1,2,4-triazol-4-yl) 