The rules of nucleic acid base-pairing have been used to construct nanoscale architectures and organize biomolecules, but little has been done to apply this technology in vivo. Here we designed and assembled multi-dimensional RNA structures and used them as scaffolds for the spatial organization of bacterial metabolism. Engineered RNA modules were assembled into discrete, one-and two-dimensional scaffolds with distinct protein docking sites, and used to control the spatial organization of a hydrogen-producing pathway. We increased hydrogen output as a function of scaffold architecture. Rationally designed RNA assemblies can thus be used to construct functional architectures in vivo.
In cells, multi-enzymatic pathways are often physically and spatially organized onto scaffolds, clusters or into microcompartments  (1) . Spatial organization helps substrates flow between interacting proteins, limits cross-talk between signaling pathways, and increases yields of sequential metabolic reactions  (1, 2) . The ability to organize protein complexes and biological pathways spatially presents a strategy to engineer cells  (3, 4) . The spatial organization of biomolecules has been the focus of DNA nanotechnology  (5) (6) (7) (8) . This approach utilizes DNA's base-pairing to generate one-, two-and threedimensional assemblies. DNA structures have largely remained limited to in vitro applications  (9) . RNA provides a compatible material for in vivo nucleic acid based construction  (10) . It can be produced via the transcription machinery, and forms stable interactions. RNA has been used to build higher-order assemblies in vitro  (11, 12)  and can potentially be used in vivo to engineer the intracellular environment. Here, we engineered synthetic RNA modules that assemble into functional discrete, one-, and two-dimensional scaffolds in vivo, and used them to control the spatial organization of bound proteins (Fig.  1A ). Scaffold D0 was constructed from a single RNA module d0, which folded into a duplex with PP7 and MS2 aptamer domains that bind PP7 and MS2 fusion proteins (Fig.  1B )  (13) . We developed an approach for the in vivo isothermal assembly of extended RNA scaffolds by constructing sequence-symmetric RNA building blocks (Fig.  1, C  and D ) inspired by two-dimensional DNA analogs  (13, 14) . These RNA strands possess dimerization (DD) and polymerization domains (PD). To prevent the formation of ill-defined networks, it was necessary to disfavor the collapse of the palindromic regions  (15)  and control assembly-order by insuring tile formation before polymerization. We achieved this by designing PDs that fold intramolecularly into kinetically protected hairpin structures (Fig.  1D , step i). The stem of these hairpins is an overlapping shared domain with DD that discourages collapse (Fig.  1D , red segments), allowing DD to "activate" PD upon self-binding (Fig.  1D , step iii). We further destabilized the collapsed-state by incorporating wobble-pairs and mispairs (figs. S1 to S4). The one-dimensional RNA assembly D1 was derived from a single RNA d1 with PP7 and MS2 binding domains (Fig.  1E ). d1 assembled into d1-1 (step i), which self-assembled into d1-2 (step iii). The torsion in d1-2 induced folding into an RNA nanotube capable of growing into the onedimensional scaffold D1 (step iv). The two-dimensional RNA assembly D2 was formed from d2' and d2'', each carrying a distinct PP7 and MS2 aptamer (Fig.  1F ). The dormant tile d2' spontaneously generated the pro-tile d2-1 (step i), which interacted with d2'' to generate tile d2-2 (step ii). d2-2 then self-assembled into the two-dimensional RNA scaffold D2 with PP7 and MS2 binding domains (step iv). In vitro transcribed RNA modules d1 and d2'/d2'' were characterized using atomic force microscopy (AFM). d1 formed one-dimensional RNA fibers D1, while d2'/d2'' assembled into two-dimensional extended RNA fibers D2 (Fig.  2A ). The width of D1 (~5 nm, a few tiles wide) is smaller than that of its DNA analog  (14) , and might thus also correspond to one-dimensional ribbons D1 2 constructed from a continuous line of single-tiles (Fig.  1E , step ii). Given that D2 preferentially grows in a single direction when compared to its DNA analog  (13) , it might also correspond to RNA nanotubes D2 2 that are relatively wider than D1 (Fig.  1D , step iii). To confirm the validity of our assemblies, we used analogs of d1 and d2' with a poly-T stretch in place of the DD incapable of assembling; d1 T and d2' T did not generate extended assemblies (Fig.  2B ). We developed a DNA-based precipitation (DP) method to purify our RNA assemblies from cells. Streptavidin-coated magnetic beads with a biotinylated DNA capture probe (DP C ) were added to cell lysates. The capture domain (CD) of DP C binds the T7 terminator in our RNA molecules (Fig.  2C , step i). The RNA assemblies were released upon addition of DP R that bound the release domain (RD) of DP C (Fig.  2C , step ii). We were able to capture and release RNA (Fig.  2D ). In vivo synthesized D1 and D2 revealed extended one-and two-dimensional assemblies (Fig.  2E  and fig.  S5 ). Crosssectional height analysis showed D1 to have two populations of distinct height (3 and 6 nm), which is characteristic of open versus closed nanotubes. In vivo D2 assembled into twodimensional structures smaller and somewhat different than their in vitro counterparts, suggesting that the assembly process in cells is of lower fidelity. To confirm that the assemblies formed in vivo, we engineered a set of inhibitory strands (IS) that bound the trigger-domains of d1' and d2'. The inhibition by these strands was confirmed in vitro (Fig.  2F ). The purification of D1/D2 in the presence of excess IS did not eliminate the observed one-and two-dimensional assemblies (Fig.  2G ), confirming the formation of D1 and D2 in cells pre-lysis. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis of whole bacterial cells expressing D1 or D2 confirmed their assembly in cells. The RNA assemblies were tagged with gold-binding metallothionin-PP7 fusion proteins P Au that form clusters (Fig.  2H )  (16) . Cells co-expressing P Au and D1 formed thin filaments 200 to 300 nm long, while cells coexpressing D2 formed compact sphere-like structures ~100 nm in diameter. D0, D1 or D2 do not affect cell growth (fig.  S12 ). Cells carrying the D1 and D2 scaffolds had higher RNA levels relative to cells expressing mutated poly-T RNA analogs (Fig.  2I ), consistent with the formation of degradation resistant assemblies. Thus, d1 and d2'/d2'' assembled in vivo into D1 and D2. We used fluorescence complementation to detect protein assembly on our RNA scaffolds (Fig.  3 ). Green fluorescent protein (GFP) split into two halves F A and F B , fused to the PP7 or MS2 aptamer binding proteins, was used (Fig.  3A ). Cells expressing F A and F B alone (Fig.  3B ) or D0, D1 or D2 without the split GFPs displayed little fluorescence. However, the co-expression of D0, D1 or D2 with the split GFPs showed increased fluorescence (Fig.  3C ). Thus our RNA scaffolds served as docking sites to promote protein-protein interactions in cells. Biological hydrogen production has both fundamental and practical implications. Co-expression of [FeFe]-hydrogenase and ferredoxin catalyzes the reduction of protons to hydrogen through electron transfer  (17) . We used this system to assess the potential of our RNA scaffolds to constrain flux through spatial organization. We fused the hydrogenase to a single copy of PP7 (H P ), and ferredoxin to a dimer of MS2 (F M ). Electrophoretic gel-shift analysis of the binding of F M and H P to D0 was conducted (Fig.  4A ). Addition of H P to D0 resulted in a single product termed D0 H . The addition of F P to D0 resulted in the formation of D0 F . The addition of H P and F M to D0 resulted in a single product assigned to the protein-RNA assembly D0 FH . H P and F M assembled onto D0 in cells to form D0 FH (Fig.  4B ). To determine whether our RNA scaffolds increased hydrogen biosynthesis, cells expressing the hydrogenproducing pathway along with the different RNA assemblies were analyzed using gas chromatography (fig.  S11 ). The relative levels of F M and H P expression in D0, D1 and D2 cells were comparable (fig.  S8 ). D0, D1 and D2 assembled F M and H P into D0 FH , D1 FH , and D2 FH (Fig.  1 ). D0 resulted in a 4.0 ± 1.3 fold increase in hydrogen production compared to unscaffolded H P and F M (Fig.  4C ). Hydrogen output with the extended assemblies D1 and D2 resulted in a 11 ± 2.8 and 48 ± 1.5 fold increase in hydrogen production (Fig.  4C ). When normalized against the amount of RNA in cells (Fig.  2I  and fig.  S7 ), D0, D1 and D2 resulted in a 4.0-, 6.2-, and 24fold increase. The increase with D2 is consistent with its assembly in vivo into "organelle-like" structures effective at concentrating proteins and their products (Fig.  2H ). Mutating the PP7 and MS2 binding sites prevented protein scaffolding (Fig.  4 , D to G). Thus, RNA can be used to organize enzymatic pathways in vivo to increase output as a function of architecture. Here we controlled the spatial organization of proteins in cells using RNA molecules that are sequence-programmed to isothermally assemble into pre-defined discrete, one-and two-dimensional structures in vivo. These assemblies scaffolded proteins, and were used to organize a hydrogenproducing biosynthetic pathway. Hydrogen production was optimized as a function of scaffold architecture. Unlike protein-based approaches  (3, 4, 17) , RNA-based scaffolds allow for the formation of complex multi-dimensional architectures with nanometer precision. In vivo RNA assemblies can thus be used to engineer biological pathways through spatial constraints  (18, 19) .