Introduction
The Neoproterozoic Era (1000-542 Ma) was an important interval subjected to dramatic climatic changes and biological evolutions in Earth's history. The Snowball Earth hypothesis suggested that the Earth was completely covered by ice sheets during the Neoproterozoic glaciation epoches  (Hoffman et al., 1998) . In the aftermath of glaciations, several lines of evidence, including iron chemistry and sulfur isotopic data from China, Canada, Oman and Australia, indicate stepwise oxygenation of the postglacial Ediacaran ocean (635-542 Ma), stimulating the evolution of early animal life  (Canfield et al., 2007; Fike et al., 2006; Komiya et al., 2008; Maruyama and Santosh, 2008; McFadden et al., 2008) . South China block provides a unique window to shed light on the early animal evolution where many biota, i.e., the Doushantuo and Weng'an biota, appeared during the Ediacaran Period (635-542 Ma)  (Chen et al., 2000; Li et al., 2008; Ohno et al., 2008; Xiao et al., 1998) . Until now, variable geochemical signatures, i.e., abundance of iron species and their ratios, molybdenum (Mo) abundance, and sulfur isotopic data, were used to document the Ediacaran oceanic redox changes in South China  (Bristow et al., 2009; McFadden et al., 2008) . In contrast, in the absence of metazoan fossils during the Cryogenian Period (750-635 Ma), less attention was paid to the oceanic changes of that time. Here, we use multi-proxies, including ratios of highly reactive iron (Fe HR ) to total iron (Fe T ) (Fe HR /Fe T ), pyrite iron (Fe P ) to highly reactive iron (Fe HR ) (Fe P /Fe HR ), total iron (Fe T ) to Al (Fe T /Al), and Mo concentrations, to illustrate the oceanic redox conditions, under which sulfur cycling was discussed as well based on the sulfur isotopic data of pyrite (δ 34 S py ) during the Cryogenian Period in South China.

Geological settings
The South China Block is generally considered to have been formed through amalgamation between the Yangtze and Cathaysia blocks during the Sibao orogeny at ca. 1.1-0.9 Ga  (Li et al., 2002; Li et al., 2009; Ye et al., 2007) , which then experienced episodic rifting between ca. 820 Ma and 542 Ma  (Li et al., 2003; Wang and Li, 2003; Wang et al., 2009) . A southeast-facing (present orientation) passive continental margin on the Yangtze Block was subsequently developed in the course of breakup of the Rodinia Supercontinent (Fig.  1A ). Thermal subsidence related to the post-rift extension of South China Block created significant accommodation space in which thick Middle-to-Late Neoproterozoic successions were deposited  (Jiang et al., 2003; Wang and Li, 2003) . Neoproterozoic stratigraphic successions in South China comprise well exposed, relatively unaltered glacial and interglacial deposits (Fig.  1B ). The Cryogenian Group unconformably overlies the slate rocks of the Banxi Group. Two main Cryogenian diamictite successions, the lower Jiangkou Group and the upper Nantuo Formation, have been recognized in South China. The interglacial Datangpo Formation of manganese-bearing shales, ∼ 10 m thick on the upper slope to ∼ 200 m thick on the lower slope  (Wang and Li, 2003) , sits on the glacial deposits of the Jiangkou Group. The Datangpo Formation includes the lower thinner black shales (∼30 m thick), the focus of this study, and the upper thicker grey shales (∼ 200 m thick) (Fig.  1B ). A pair U-Pb zircon ages of 663 ± 4 Ma  (Zhou et al., 2004)  and 654.5 ± 3.8 Ma  (Zhang et al., 2008)  for the tuffaceous beds in the basal and topmost Datangpo Formation provides a constraint for the timing of this interglacial interval.

Methods
In this study, we choose the Mingle section, where the interglacial Datangpo Formation comprises the lower 30 m-thick black shales and the upper 180 m-thick grey shales (Fig.  1 ). 16 samples, each at approximately 2 m apart, were collected in the lower 30 m-thick black shales for geochemical analysis. For each sample, ca. 5 g of fresh shale was grinded to powder (200 mesh in size) in an automated agate mill. Different iron species, including pyrite iron (Fe P ), dithioniteextractable iron (Fe D ) and highly reactive iron (Fe HR ), were analyzed in this study. Extraction of Fe D has followed the method of  Canfield (1989) . 0.2 g sample powder was firstly digested with a 10 ml buffer solution composed of 58.8 g/l tri-sodium citrate dihydrate (C 6 H 5 Na 3- O 7 •2H 2 O) and 20 ml/l acetic acid, then was added with approximate 0.5 g sodium dithionite. The concentrations of dithionite-extractable iron were determined by AAS at Institute of Geology and Geophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IGGCAS). Pyrite iron (Fe P ) was extracted following the chromium reduction method  (Canfield et al., 1986; Chu et al., 1994) . Approximate 0.5-1.0 g samples were reacted with 40 ml of 1 M CrCl 2 in an N 2 gas. H 2 S produced from pyrite reduction by CrCl 2 was bubbled through a 2% AgNO 3 trap where it was precipitated as Ag 2 S. The Ag 2 S precipitate was dried and weighed to determine the concentration of pyrite sulfur, and the amount of iron bound in pyrite (Fe P ) was calculated with a molar Fe:S ratio of 1:2. Fe HR was determined by calculating through the relation as Fe HR =Fe P +Fe D . Major elements, including total iron content (Fe T ), and Al were measured by X-ray fluorescence (XRF). Ca. 1.2 g power samples were weighted and burned in a muffle oven at 1000 °C for the removal of organic carbon and pyrite in the samples. The residues were mixed with 6.0 g of Li 2 B 4 O 7 , and fused to glass beads in Pt crucibles at 1100 °C. All the beads were analyzed by XRF-1500 Sequential X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometer (SHIMADZU Inc.) at IGGCAS. Element Mo was extracted from bulk, dried powders using HF/ HNO 3 /HClO 4 digestions. We analyze it for molybdenum on ICP-MS Element at IGGCAS. A set of Chinese national and USGS rock standard, GBW07107 (shale) and GXR5 (soil), were chosen for calibrating element concentrations of unknowns. Analytical accuracy is better than 5%. For sulfur isotope analysis, Ag 2 S precipitate above was homogenized with cupric oxide and combusted under vacuum for a conversion to sulfur dioxide (approximate 15 mg of Ag 2 S and 150 mg of Cu 2 O were combusted at 1050 °C for 15 min and analyzed at IGGCAS on a Finnigan Delta S gas source mass spectrometer). Sulfur isotope results are generally reproducible within ±0.3‰. Total carbon (TC%) and total inorganic carbon (TIC%) concentrations were measured with an Elementar high TOC 2 at IGGCAS. A Chinese national rock standard, GBW07402, was used. Accuracy was better than 3% for TC and TIC concentrations. TOC (total organic carbon) content is calculated by subtracting TIC from TC.

Results and discussions


Paleo-redox conditions


Ratios of iron species
Ratios of different iron species, i.e., Fe HR /Fe T , Fe P /Fe HR and Fe T /Al ratios, are illustrated in Fig.  2  and Table  1 . Fe HR /Fe T ratios in the black shales of studied horizon vary from 0.10 to 0.88, averaging 0.50, in which three short-term negative spikes (N1 to N3) are unraveled, showing fluctuant variations of Fe HR /Fe T ratios. Fe P /Fe HR ratios vary from 0.09 to 0.80, averaging 0.50, mimicking well the variation pattern of Fe HR /Fe T ratios. Fe T /Al ratios vary from 0.03 to 0.58, averaging 0.25, similarly following the variation patterns of those ratios listed above. Modern sediments deposited under an oxic water column generally produce a low proportion of Fe HR relative to Fe T contents, yielding a Fe HR /Fe T ratio of 0.38  (Raiswell and Canfield, 1998; Wijsman et al., 2001a) . In contrast, sediments accumulated under an anoxic water column can have a higher proportion of Fe HR , thereby yielding a Fe HR /Fe T ratio greater than 0.38. Accordingly, most of our Fe HR /Fe T ratios are greater than 0.38, suggesting an overall anoxic conditions (Fig.  2 ). However, the appearance of three short-term negative spikes with Fe HR /Fe T ratios b0.38 indicates multiple incursions of oxic water masses in the context of anoxic water conditions. Furthermore, the upward decrease in Fe HR /Fe T ratios and increase in the timing for negative spikes (Fig.  2 ) implicate an overall oxygenating, although episodic, trend in oceanic condition. This scenario is further corroborated by the overlying grey shale successions corresponding to a sea level fall prelude to the Marinoan glaciation. The Fe P /Fe HR ratio is a proxy representing the extent to which Fe HR has been converted to pyrite  (Anderson and Raiswell, 2004) . Evidence from the Black Sea and other euxinic (or sulfidic) basins shows that  sediments deposited there commonly yield Fe P /Fe HR ratios greater than 0.80  (Anderson and Raiswell, 2004) ; those deposited under anoxic, ferruginous water columns generally have Fe P /Fe HR ratios less than 0.80  (Canfield et al., 2008; Poulton et al., 2004) . Our data show that most of the samples with elevated Fe HR /Fe T ratios (N0.38) have Fe P /Fe HR ratios b0.80 (Fig.  2 ), suggesting an overall anoxic (ferruginous) rather than euxinic water columns under which the black shales were deposited, reconciling the redox condition as stated above. This oceanic condition is supported by evidence elsewhere, i.e., in the synchronous outer shelf and deep basin of Canada, Greenland, where Fe HR /Fe T ratios are greater than 0.38, but Fe P /Fe HR ratios are less than 0.80  (Canfield et al., 2008) . However, we note that Fe P /Fe HR ratios for two samples (ML82, and ML60) approximating 0.8 could suggest the episodic occurrence of water column intermittent euxinia during the deposition of the black shales, reflecting a local or basin-scale scenario. In addition, Fe T /Al is also useful as a paleo-redox proxy  (Lyons and Severmann, 2006) . The typical modern euxinic basin like the Black Sea has the elevated Fe T /Al ratios (0.6 to 1.2)  (Lyons and Severmann, 2006) . Throughout the Datangpo black shales, Fe T /Al ratios are generally less than or approximate those of the average shales (Fe T / Al = 0.51) (Fig.  2 )  (Taylor and McLennan, 1985) . Therefore, together with the ratios of different iron species of the Datangpo black shales as mentioned above, Fe T /Al ratios further confirm that water column may not be persistent euxinia during the deposition of the Datangpo black shales.

Mo concentrations
In the ocean, Mo exists primarily as the soluble molybdate complex (MoO 4

2-
). A critical activity of hydrogen sulfide (ca. 50-250 uM HS -) would facilitate conversion of molybdate (MoO 4 2-) to thiomolybdates (MoO 4-x S x 2-) that are subsequently scavenged by sedimentary particles  (Helz et al., 1996; Zheng et al., 2000) . Because of the low background values (ca. 1-2 ppm), Mo is the most sensitive redox elements compared to the other trace metals. In order to discern the redox conditions, the elemental compositions are usually compared after normalizing the trace metal concentrations to Al, a proxy for aluminosilicate detritus  (Tribovillard et al., 2006; Van der Weijden, 2002) . In addition, trace metal (TM) concentrations are expressed in terms of enrichment factors (EF TM ), where the Al-normalized metal concentration is compared to the average shale values  (Wedepohl, 1971 (Wedepohl, , 1991)) : EF TM = TM/Al sample :TM/Al average shale . When EF TM N 1, the trace metal of interest is enriched relative to average shale. Fig.  2  and Table  1  illustrate that enrichment in molybdenum occurs throughout the Datangpo black shales (2.5b EF Mo b 40.6, average =16.9). Additionally, the molybdenum concentrations show a decreasing trend, reconciling the oxic conditions suggested by different iron species ratios. On the other hand, we note that molybdenum concentrations and iron species ratios do not show similar fluctuations throughout the black shales. Therefore, molybdenum enrichment throughout the black shales may not be simply governed by the benthic redox potential in the late anoxic intervals. In fact, authigenic molybdenum enrichment requires the accumulation of free H 2 S as well as a source of dissolved Mo (MoO 4 2-)  (Tribovillard et al., 2006) . For example, during the Archean Eon, the low molybdenum concentrations (2-5 ppm) in the persistent euxinic water column could owe to small amounts of dissolved Mo (MoO 4 2-) resulting from weak oxidative weathering of continental materials  (Scott et al., 2008) . In the case, little molybdenum enrichment in the late anoxic intervals possibly results from decrease dissolved Mo (MoO 4 2-) owing to massive uptake by anoxic sediments. S as those of the Minle section (Fig.  3 )  (Chen et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2006) .

Pyrite sulfur isotope and sulfur cycling
In the marine environment, metastable iron sulfides and ultimately pyrite are formed and stored in the sediments  (Berner, 1970; Berner, 1984)  when H 2 S released by bacterial sulfate reduction (BSR) encounters reactive iron. During bacterial sulfate reduction (BSR), 32 S is preferentially reduced from source sulfate, producing a 32 S-riched sulfide (H 2 S) product  (Canfield, 2001; Kaplan and Rittenberg, 1964) . The reaction of iron with H 2 S produces little to no isotopic fractionation  (Fry et al., 1988; Price and Shieh, 1979) . In general, the magnitude of the fractionation between sulfate and sulfide is controlled by sulfate availability. Larger fractionations are typically expressed under non-limiting sulfate concentrations where microbes have a large reservoir of sulfate that allows them to dissimilate 32 S preferentially. In cases of the modern ocean like Black Sea with a sulfate concentration of about 28 mM, sulfur isotopic compositions in the shelf and basinal sediments are enriched in light isotope 32 S  (Wijsman et al., 2001b ) (Fig.  3 ). On the other hand, smaller fractionations and positive δ 34 S Py values always occur (i.e. δ 34 S Py are equal or close to coeval δ 34 S sulfate ) when sulfate is limiting, i.e., throughout Precambrian time. For example, pyrites from the deep sulfidic basin were enriched in 34 S in the Australian Mesoproterozoic Roper Basin (Fig.  3 ). Therefore, the more 34 S-enriched pyrites in the Datangpo black shales likely reflect a lower sulfate concentration in South China rift basin compared to those in the Australian Mesoproterozoic Roper Basin. Multiple evidence indicate that the sulfate concentrations gradually increase over the Earth history  (Anbar and Knoll, 2002; Kah et al., 2004) . However, the low sulfate concentrations could exist in the Cryogenian ocean, indicating that the sulfur cycling must significantly change during the Cryogenian Period. During the most severe ice ages in Earth history (Sturtian and Marinoan glaciations), the riverine flux of sulfate to the ocean could decrease because the hydrologic cycle was diminished during the glaciations  (Hoffman et al., 1998) . When ocean anoxia developed as a result of extensive ice cover, a substantial portion of the marine sulfate reservoir would have been removed via bacterial sulfate reduction and iron sulfide burial. Generally, as the Sturtian glaciation ended and the hydrologic cycle was reinvigorated, marine sulfate levels should have increased through the interglacial interval due to the enhanced oxidative weathering of continent. Nevertheless, the sulfate reservoir after the glaciation could be still small due to an extremely low background of sulfate concentrations in association with the Sturtian glaciation. Subsequently, the intermittent euxinic conditions stimulated by increase organic flux and sulfate concentrations occurred in the water column during the interglacial interval, suggested by iron species ratios (Fe HR /Fe T N 0.38 and Fe P / Fe HR ≈ 0.80). Meanwhile, the marked enrichments of Mo were seen in the lower-20 m Datangpo shales. Similarly, the above scenario appeared in the Archean Eon when low sulfate concentrations and enrichment of molybdenum (maximum value: 40 ppm) also concurrently occurred under a low atmospheric oxygen level (PO 2 is b10 -5 PAL (present atmospheric level))  (Anbar et al., 2007; Farquhar and Wing, 2003; Pavlov and Kasting, 2004; Reinhard et al., 2009) .

Conclusions
Multiple ratios between iron species (Fe HR /Fe T , Fe P /Fe HR , and Fe T /Al) and Mo concentrations from the Datangpo black shales suggest that an overall anoxic (ferruginous) condition predominated over the deposition, although several short-term oxic and euxinic episodes interrupted. The superheavy δ 34 S Py values suggest a small size of sulfate reservoir during the interglacial epoch. The small-size sulfate reservoir and concurrent enrichment of molybdenum indicate that the ocean chemistry in the Cryogenian Period is similar to that in the Archean Eon.