Weyl semimetals provide a condensed matter realization of massless relativistic fermions 
[1] . Their spectrum features a diabolo-shaped surface in energy-momentum space that separates helical electronlike states (moving in the direction of the momentum) from holelike states (moving opposite to the momentum)  [2] . These "Weyl cones" are the three-dimensional analogue of the two-dimensional Dirac cones in graphene. The third spatial dimension provides a topological protection, by which the conical point (Weyl point) cannot be opened up unless two Weyl cones of opposite helicity are brought together in momentum space  [3] . Although the Weyl point cannot be locally removed, the cones can be tilted and may even tip over  [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] . For the relativistic Weyl cone such a distortion is forbidden by particle-hole symmetry, but that is not a fundamental symmetry in condensed matter. While in graphene the high symmetry of the honeycomb lattice keeps the cone upright, strain providing only a weak tilt  [13] , the tilting can be strong in 3D Weyl semimetals. This leads to a natural division of Weyl cones into two topologically distinct types  [9] . In type I the cone is only weakly tilted so that the electronlike states and holelike states occupy separate energy ranges, above or below the Weyl point. In type II the cone has tipped over so that electron and hole states coexist in energy. Many experimental realizations of a type-II Weyl semimetal have recently been reported  [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] . In a magnetic field the coexisting electron and hole pockets of a type-II Weyl semimetal are coupled by tunneling through the Weyl point (Fig.  1 ). Here we investigate how this process, a momentum space manifestation of Klein tunneling  [22] , affects the magnetic quantum oscillations of the density of states (de Haas-van Alphen effect), providing a unique thermodynamic signature of the topologically protected band structure (an alternative to proposed transport signatures  [9, [23] [24] [25] ). Because the quantum oscillations are governed by extremal cross sections of the Fermi surface, one might wonder whether some symmetry is required to align the extremal cross section with the Weyl point, so that it becomes observable. Our analysis shows that a magnetic field axis for this alignment exists generically, because of the Möbius strip topology of the projective plane. We first consider Klein tunneling through a single type-II Weyl point, and then turn to pairs of Weyl cones of opposite helicity, which can be combined in topologically distinct ways  [8] -with a qualitatively different dependence on the Klein tunneling probability. To first order in momentum k, the Hamiltonian of a Weyl cone has the generic form Tunneling between the pockets happens with a probability T that tends to unity when their minimal separation Δk → 0. This magnetic breakdown is a manifestation of Klein tunneling in momentum space. H ¼ X ij v ij k i σ j þ a tilt k x σ 0 ; ð1Þ in terms of Pauli matrices σ i , i ∈ fx; y; zg (unit matrix σ 0 ). The eigenvalues lie on two hyperboloid sheets E AE , E AE ¼ a tilt k x AE ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi X ijl v il v jl k i k j s ; ð2Þ that touch at the Weyl point k ¼ 0. For sufficiently small a tilt the Fermi surface contains either electronlike states in E þ or holelike states in E -, depending on the sign of the Fermi energy relative to the Weyl point. With increasing a tilt the Weyl cone is tilted in the (arbitrarily chosen) x direction, and when it tips over coexisting electron and hole states appear on the Fermi surface. This is the type-I to type-II Weyl semimetal transition  [9] . The hyperboloid dispersion (2) only holds near the Weyl point. In the physical realizations of a type-II Weyl semimetal the Fermi surface closes away from the Weyl point, forming compact electron and hole pockets. A cross section is defined by fixing an axis (unit vector n) and choosing a coordinate q along that axis. The intersection of the Fermi surface with the plane n • k ¼ q is an oriented contour C AE ðqÞ enclosing the signed area A AE ðqÞ (positive for C þ and negative for C -). The contours are the classical momentum-space orbits for a magnetic field B in the n direction, the change in orientation between C þ and C -resulting from the sign change of the effective mass in the electron and hole pockets. Semiclassical quantization of the orbits produces Landau tubes  [26] , with quantized cross-sectional area A AE ðqÞ ¼ 2πðn þ νÞeB=ℏ; n¼ AE1; AE2: ð3Þ The Maslov index ν ¼ 1=2 for massive electrons, while ν ¼ 0 for massless Weyl fermions  [27] . The Landau tubes give rise to oscillations in the density of states periodic in 1=B [28], δρ=ρ 0 ¼ Ref½-iA 00 AE ðq c Þ -1=2 e 2πiðF AE =B-νÞ g; ð4Þ with frequency given by the Onsager relation  [29, 30]   F AE ¼ ðℏ=2πeÞjA AE j: ð5Þ The extremal area A AE ¼ A AE ðq c Þ is the area at which the first derivative dA AE ðqÞ=dq ¼ 0. The contour enclosing the extremal area is denoted by C AE . The two sheets E AE of a type-II Weyl cone are coupled by quantum tunneling. This magnetic-field-induced tunneling between electron and hole pockets is the momentum space counterpart of Klein tunneling at a p-n junction in graphene  [31] , and can be analyzed along the same lines  [32] . The effect of a magnetic field B in, say, the y direction, with vector potential A ¼ ðBz; 0; 0Þ, is accounted for by the substitution k x ↦k x þ eBz (setting ℏ ¼ 1). In momentum representation, the Schrödinger equation Hψ ¼ Eψ reads iU 0 ∂ψ ∂k z ¼ Uðk z Þψ; U 0 ¼ eB X j v xj σ j þ a tilt σ 0 ; ð6aÞ Uðk z Þ ¼ Eσ 0 - X ij v ij k i σ j -a tilt k x σ 0 : ð6bÞ For a tilt > ð P j v 2 xj Þ 1=2 the matrix U 0 is positive definite, so that it can be factorized as U 0 ¼ VV † with invertible V and we may write i∂ψ=∂k z ¼ V -1 Uðk z ÞðV † Þ -1 ψ ≡ Hðk z Þψ; ð7Þ with Hðk z Þ ¼ H 0 þ H 1 k z . If we interpret k z ≡ t as "time," this looks like a Schrödinger equation for a spin-1=2 particle with time-dependent Hamiltonian HðtÞ. Because the t dependence of HðtÞ is linear, we can use the Landau-Zener formula for the tunneling probability between the electron and hole pockets  [33] . Quite generally, for a two-level system with timedependent Hamiltonian HðtÞ ¼ αt þ c γ γ Ã βt þ c 0 ; ð8Þ the Landau-Zener tunnel probability is T ¼ expð-2πjγj 2 jα -βj -1 Þ: ð9Þ The matrix (  7 ) is of the form (8) in the basis where H 1 is diagonal, so in that basis we can read off the coefficients α, β, γ needed to determine T. For a specific example we consider the Hamiltonian (1) with v ij ¼ v i δ ij , which for a tilt > v x represents a type-II Weyl cone. We find T ¼ exp - πℏ eB v 2 x E 2 þ v 2 y k 2 y ða 2 tilt -v 2 x Þ v z ða 2 tilt -v 2 x Þ 3=2 ¼ exp - πℏ 4eBv z ðΔkÞ 2 ða 2 tilt -v 2 x Þ 1=2 ; ð10Þ with Δk the minimal separation of the contours C þ and C -. This has the general form of the interband tunnel probability in the theory of magnetic breakdown  [30, [34] [35] [36] , with a breakdown field B c ∝ ðΔkÞ 2 . The characteristic feature of Klein tunneling is that the tunnel probability T → 1 and B c → 0 at the conical point of the band structure-here a 3D Weyl point and a 2D Dirac point in Ref.  [22] . To illustrate the effect of Klein tunneling between electron and hole pockets on the magnetic quantum oscillations in the density of states, we consider the model Hamiltonian  [37]   H ¼ τ z ðt 0 σ x sin k x þ t 0 σ y sin k y Þ þ tτ z σ 0 sin k z þ τ x σ 0 ðμ -t cos k x -t cos k y -t cos k z Þ þ bτ 0 σ z þ ½a tilt sin k x þ ξð1 -cos k x Þτ 0 σ 0 : ð11Þ This is a tight-binding Hamiltonian on a cubic lattice (lattice constant a 0 ¼ 1), with a spin and orbital degree of freedom on each lattice site (Pauli matrices σ i and τ i , respectively). The time-reversal symmetry breaking term b splits the Dirac cone into two Weyl cones separated along the z axis. To produce a type-II Weyl semimetal we have added a tilting term a tilt and a term ξ that breaks the symmetry between the electron and hole pockets. As derived in Appendix A of the Supplemental Material  [38] , near a Weyl point the effective low-energy Hamiltonian has the form (1) with diagonal velocity tensor v ij ¼ v i δ ij given by v x ¼ v y ¼ ð2t -μÞ 2 -t 2 þ b 2 2bð2t -μÞ t 0 ; ð12aÞ v z ¼ 1 2b ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ffi ½ðt -μÞ 2 -b 2 ½b 2 -ð3t -μÞ 2 q : ð12bÞ The Hamiltonian (11) retains a mirror symmetry in the x-z plane (to be removed later on), which implies that for a magnetic field in the y direction the areas A AE ðk y Þ are extremal for k y ¼ 0. By means of exact diagonalization  [39]  we have calculated the partial density of states ρðE; B; k y Þ ¼ P p δ½E -E p ðB; k y Þ for k y ¼ 0, assuming that this gives the dominant contribution to the magnetic quantum oscillations. We choose the gauge A ¼ ð0; 0; -BxÞ, with a rational flux Ba 2 0 ¼ 1=N × h=e through a unit cell. The lattice has dimensions N × NM in the x-z plane (M ≫ N ≫ 1), with periodic boundary conditions in both directions. Figure  2  shows the energy spectrum as a function of magnetic field and Fig.  3  shows the periodicity of the magnetic oscillations, extracted from a Fourier transform of the density of states. When the Fermi level is far from the Weyl point E ¼ 0, the electron and hole pockets contribute separately with frequencies F AE set by the extremal areas A AE . The slopes dF AE =dE have opposite sign in the two pockets, signifying the opposite sign of the cyclotron effective mass m AE ¼ ℏ 2 2π d dE jA AE j: ð13Þ Near the Weyl point a low-frequency component appears at the difference jF þ -F -j, and the individual high-frequency components F AE are suppressed. In a semiclassical description, the orbit responsible for the difference frequency is the "figure of eight" orbit formed by joining C þ to C -at the Weyl point [see Fig.  1(b) ]. The corresponding effective mass m Σ ¼ ℏ 2 2π d dE jA þ þ A -j ð 14Þ FIG.  2 . Energy spectrum at k y ¼ 0 of the type-II Weyl semimetal with Hamiltonian (11 governs the Landau fan in Fig.  2 , ) (parameters t ¼ 1, t 0 ¼ 2, μ ¼ 3, b ¼ 1.2, a tilt ¼ 1.7, ξ ¼ 0. E p ðBÞ ¼ E p ð0Þ þ p × ℏeB=m Σ : ð15Þ Notice the absence of a 1=2 offset from the integer p, canceled by a Berry phase. The tunnel probability  (10)  evaluates for our model parameters to TðEÞ ¼ exp½-0.52NðE=tÞ 2 . The contribution of an orbit to the Fourier amplitude contains a factor t ¼ ffiffiffi ffi T p for each transmission through the Weyl point and a factor r ¼ ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi 1 -T p for each reflection  [40] . In Fig.  4  we plot the peak heights of Fig.  3  as a function of energy. The solid lines are fits to Ω AE ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi 1 -TðEÞ p and Ω Σ TðEÞ, with energyindependent fit parameters Ω AE , Ω Σ . We take for the inverse field strength N ¼ 850, the midpoint of the interval used in the Fourier transform. A good match to the predicted Gaussian TðEÞ is obtained. The above analysis was simplified by the mirror symmetry in the x-z plane, because we could immediately identify the special magnetic field axis for which the extremal contours C AE in the electron and hole pockets both touch the Weyl point when E → 0, allowing for Klein tunneling. One might wonder how restrictive this alignment is-is it possible to find such a special axis in the absence of any symmetry? The answer is yes, as we demonstrate with the help of Fig.  5 . At E ¼ 0 we plot the polar and azimuthal angles θ AE , ϕ AE of the magnetic field axis for which the extremal contour C AE touches the Weyl point. Because ðθ; ϕÞ and ðπ -θ; π þ ϕÞ represent the same axis, we may restrict ϕ to the range ½0; π-half the usual range for spherical coordinates-identifying the end points ðθ; 0Þ and ðπ -θ; πÞ. The ðθ; ϕÞ plane with these "twisted" periodic boundary conditions is the so-called projective plane P 2 , and has the topology of a Möbius strip. If the loops L þ ¼ ðθ þ ; ϕ þ Þ and L -¼ ðθ -; ϕ -Þ both wind around the Möbius strip, as they do in Fig.  5 , they must necessarily intersect because of the twist. The point of intersection is the special axis at which both C þ and C - touch the Weyl point. In Appendix B in the Supplemental Material  [38]  we show that such noncontractible loops always exist if the Fermi surface is convex, independent of any symmetry requirement. So far we considered Klein tunneling at a single Weyl point. A second Weyl point of opposite helicity necessarily and Ω Σ T, with the transmission probability TðEÞ calculated from Eq. (  10 ) and energy-independent fit parameters Ω AE , Ω Σ . When two frequency lines in Fig.  3  cross we cannot reliably determine the individual amplitudes-which explains some of the large scatter in the data points. FIG.  5 . Magnetic field axis L AE ¼ ðθ AE ; ϕ AE Þ for which the extremal contour C AE at E ¼ 0 touches the Weyl point. The dashed curves correspond to the Hamiltonian  (11)  with the parameters of Fig.  1 . For the solid curves we have broken the mirror symmetry by adding the term V 0 τ 0 σ 0 sin k y with V 0 ¼ 0.5. The intersection of L þ and L -(encircled) is the special axis at which Klein tunneling between electron and hole pockets produces magnetic quantum oscillations with the difference frequency jF þ -F -j, suppressing both the electron and hole frequencies F AE . The intersection is protected by the topology of the Möbius strip (indicated by arrows, which show how the edges at ϕ ¼ 0; π should be glued with a twist). FIG.  6 . Left panels: Dependence on the orientation of the magnetic field of the amplitude of the magnetic quantum oscillations (normalized to unit maximal amplitude), for a fixed Fermi energy E F ¼ 0. Pairs of type-II Weyl points at E ¼ 0 with disconnected or connected Fermi surfaces are compared. The right panels show a cross section through the electron and hole pockets. For each curve in the left panels the corresponding orbit is indicated. The calculations, detailed in Appendix C in the Supplemental Material  [38] , are for the Hamiltonian  (11)  with parameters t ¼ 1, μ ¼ 3, b ¼ 1.2, a tilt ¼ 1.7 for all panels and t 0 ¼ 2, ξ ¼ 0.08 (top panels); t 0 ¼ 1.7, ξ ¼ 0.24 (bottom panels). exists in the Brillouin zone, and this allows for topologically distinct Fermi surfaces  [8] . In Fig.  6  we illustrate how Klein tunneling can distinguish connected from disconnected pairs of type-II Weyl cones, by the qualitatively different dependence on the magnetic field orientation. Experimentally, Klein tunneling through a type-II Weyl point can be detected in measurements of the de Haas-van Alphen effect in the magnetic susceptibility. With sufficient doping WTe 2 would produce disconnected type-II Weyl cones near the Fermi energy  [9, 41] , while they are connected in undoped LaAlGe  [15] . Klein tunneling is a powerful diagnostic for such topologically distinct Fermi surfaces.