The CRISPR-Cas9 system from bacteria has been recently applied to genome editing in different species, including Drosophila 
(Yu et al., 2013) , C. elegans  (Dickinson et al., 2013; Friedland et al., 2013) , zebrafish  (Chang et al., 2013; Hwang et al., 2013; Jao et al., 2013) , mouse  (Cho et al., 2013; Cong et al., 2013) , rat  (Li et al., 2013a (Li et al., , 2013b)) , and human  (Cong et al., 2013; Jinek et al., 2013; Mali et al., 2013) . Impressively, by directly injecting Cas9 mRNA and single-guide RNAs (sgRNAs) into zygotes, mice or rats carrying mutations in transgenes or multiple endogenous genes can be generated in one step  (Li et al., 2013a (Li et al., , 2013b;; Shen et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2013) , indicating that the CRISPR-Cas9 system can be used as an effective tool for genome engineering  (Gaj et al., 2013) . Nevertheless, successful correction of disease-causing mutations in animal models via the CRISPR-Cas9 system has not yet been demonstrated. In this study, we report the efficient correction of a mutant gene in a mouse disease model by zygote injection of CRISPR-Cas9, and we report subsequent successful transmission of the corrected trait to the next generation. We chose a mouse model of dominant cataract disorder caused by a defined mutation in the Crygc gene  (Zhao et al., 2010) . These mice carry a 1 bp deletion in exon 3 of Crygc. This mutation leads to a stop codon at the 76 th amino acid (Figure  1A ) and thus the production of truncated gC-crystallin, resulting in nuclear cataracts (Figure  1B ) in both homozygous and heterozygous mutant mice at weaning  (Zhao et al., 2010) . We first tested the feasibility of CRISPR-Cas9-mediated genetic repair at the cellular level. To this end, we designed five sgRNAs targeting different regions in the mutant Crygc gene. sgRNA-1, sgRNA-2, and sgRNA-3 were designed to target regions spanning the site of 1 bp deletion in mutant allele (Figure  1C  and Supplemental Experimental Procedures available online). sgRNA-4 was designed to target the region immediately downstream of the 1 bp deletion, which we reasoned might be highly specific for the mutant allele due to the fact that the 1 bp deletion in the mutant allele produced a neo-protospacer adjacent motif (neo-PAM) that is not present in the WT allele (Figure  1C  and Supplemental Experimental Procedures). sgRNA-5 targeted the normal sequence upstream of the deletion (Figure  1C  and Supplemental Experimental Procedures). In preliminary experiments, we investigated the specificity of sgRNAs by separately transfecting plasmids expressing both the mammalian-codon-optimized Cas9 and each of the five sgRNAs into WT E14 embryonic stem cells (ESCs)  (Cong et al., 2013; Mali et al., 2013) . For each sgRNA, PCR products corresponding to the putative target region were amplified from the resulting ESC clones. The results showed that sgRNA-2 and sgRNA-5 efficiently targeted the WT alleles and led to nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ)-mediated mutations of the Crygc gene, while sgRNA-1 and sgRNA-3 did so much less frequently (Table  S1 ). By contrast, no mutation was detected in ESC clones transfected with sgRNA-4 (Table  S1 ). We performed similar experiments in heterozygous mutant ESCs (termed mCrygc ESCs) and found that all of the sgRNAs could induce cleavage at the mutant Crygc allele (Table  S1 ). Consistent with the results from the E14 ESCs, we found that sgRNA-2 and sgRNA-5 targeted both the WT and mutant alleles in mCrygc ESCs, while the other three sgRNAs only targeted the mutant allele. Importantly, while all of the sgRNAs could induce (G) DNA sequence of PCR products amplified from the Crygc gene of a heterogeneous mutant mouse (Crygc +/À ) and a repaired mouse carrying the corrected allele induced by HDR after zygote-injection of Cas9 mRNA and sgRNA-4. Two peaks can be observed in the sequence of the control heterogeneous mutant (Crygc +/À ) mouse, while the HDR-repaired mouse has only one peak. (H) A repaired mouse carrying the correct allele induced by HDR and a control heterogeneous mutant (Crygc +/À ) mouse. The repaired mouse after CRISPR-Cas9mediated gene correction is free of cataracts, as measured by the appearance of black lenses compared to the opacity of the lens in control heterogeneous mutant mouse (Crygc +/À ). (I) Histological analysis of lenses prepared from repaired mice via HDR (6 weeks old) and control heterogeneous mutant mice (Crygc +/À ) (6 weeks old). While the heterogeneous mutant mouse (Crygc +/À ) shows vacuole-like degeneration in the equatorial region of the entire eye, the cataract-free mouse exhibits normal histological features. (J) Progeny with a repaired mouse (HDR-based) developed from a zygote after injection of Cas9 mRNA and sgRNA-4. (K) DNA sequencing analysis of progeny. Note that the sequence of PCR products amplified from the Crygc gene shows only one peak in all 13 pups, indicating that the corrected trait of the repaired mice could be successfully transmitted to the next generation. See also Figures  S1  and S2  and Tables  S1  and S2 .

Cell Stem Cell
CRISPR-Cas9-Mediated Genetic Correction in Mice NHEJ-based deletions and insertions as expected (Table  S1 ), sgRNA-4 could also efficiently promote HDR-based precise gene editing (16 of 36 ESC clones sequenced) (Table  S1 ), indicating that Cas9-induced DNA breaks in the mutant Crygc allele could be repaired through HDR using the normal allele on the homologous chromosome as a template (Figure  1D ). Taken together, these data suggest that sgRNA-4 specifically targets the mutant allele; this effect is likely due to the neo-PAM contained in the mutant allele. We thus selected sgRNA-4 for our subsequent targeting experiments. We next asked whether the genetic defect in the cataract mouse model could be corrected at the organism level (defined as the functional correction of the cataract phenotype) by injection of CRISPR-Cas9 into zygotes  (Shen et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2013) . Cas9 mRNA and sgRNA-4 were coinjected into the cytoplasm of zygotes that were harvested from B6D2F1 females mated with homozygous cataract males (Figure  1E ). The injected zygotes developed into blastocysts at a rate of 91% (Table  1 ), indicating a low toxicity of the injected RNAs. Of the 135 transferred blastocysts that were derived after the injection, a total of 22 live pups were born (Table  1 ). Upon DNA sequencing analysis, we identified 10 mice carrying genetic modifications of the mutant allele (Figure  1F ). We failed to detect any gene editing events in the WT allele of these gene-modified mice, confirming the specificity of sgRNA-4 in targeting the mutant allele. Similar to our previous observations in ESCs, gene-editing events induced by the CRISPR-Cas9 system included NHEJ-mediated insertions and deletions (6 of 10 mice) and HDR-mediated repair (4 of 10 mice) (Figures  1F  and 1G ). As expected, all four mice that carried the corrected allele induced by HDR were free of cataracts, as measured by the appearance of black lenses compared to the opacity of the lens in control mice developed from heterozygous mutant embryos (20 of 20 mice) (Figure  1H ). Interestingly, two of the six mice that carried NHEJ-mediated insertions or deletions also displayed normal lenses (Figure  1F  and Figure  S1A ). An analysis of the nucleotide sequences of the mutant allele in these two mice revealed that the cataract phenotype is likely corrected by the new insertion of one nucleotide in one case or the new net deletion of five nucleotides in another, both resulting in the restoration of the correct open reading frame for the WTgC-crystallin (Figure  1F  and Figure  S1B ). Next, we asked whether supplying an exogenous WT singlestranded DNA oligo (termed Oligo-1) would lead to increased efficiency of HDR-mediated precise genome repair by coinjecting Cas9 mRNA, sgRNA-4, and Oligo-1 into the cytoplasm of heterozygous cataract mutation-bearing zygotes  (Figures S2A and S2B and Supplemental Experimental Procedures) . From this set of experiments, a total of 29 live pups were born from 178 transferred blastocysts (Table  1 ). DNA sequencing results (Figure  S2C ) showed that 14 mice carried gene modifications of the mutant allele. Of these, nine were free of cataracts (Figure  S2D ), a frequency similar to the case of injection of Cas9 mRNA and sgRNA-4 (9/29 versus 6/22). Further analysis of DNA sequences showed that five of these nine cataract-free mice carried a corrected Crygc gene derived from HDR. The remaining four mice were apparently repaired by NHEJ, with either a new insertion of one nucleotide (two pups) or new deletions of 2+3n nucleotides (two pups) (Figure  S2C ), restoring the correct open reading frame in all cases. To dissect whether the CRISPR-Cas9-induced HDR utilized information from the normal allele on the homologous chromosome or the exogenous oligo template, we designed a Crygc oligo (termed Oligo-2) harboring two synonymous mutations (Supplemental Experimental Procedures); this oligo would allow us to discriminate the origin of the recombination template (Figure  S2E ). A total of 27 live pups were born from 159 transferred blastocysts; of these, 9 were free of cataracts (Table  1 ). Of the four mice cured via HDR, we found that three of them carried modified Crygc genes with a DNA sequence that was same as the exogenous oligo, and the remaining one had a DNA sequence identical to that of the WT allele  (Figures S2F and S2G) . Taken together, our data suggest that while supplying exogenous oligos may not be necessary, the exogenous oligonucleotide could serve as an optional template for repairing the mutant gene, especially when the endogenous allele cannot be used as the template (as in homozygous genetic diseases). In this study, 24 mice were cured of cataracts using the CRISPR-Cas9 system. To further confirm the correction of the disease, we performed histological analysis of lenses prepared from repaired and control cataract mice. As shown in Figure  1I  and Figure  S2H , control cataract mice showed pathological changes in the equatorial region of their entire eyes, but the cataract-free mice that were cured via HDR or NHEJ-mediated gene editing (two or three mice, respectively) exhibited normal histological features. One major hindrance to the therapeutic application of the CRISPR-Cas9 system is the potential for offtarget mutations; we therefore examined off-target effects in the repaired mice. Given the recent findings that a maximum level of mismatch that could be tolerated in the ''target'' sequence is no more than five nucleotides  (Fu et al., 2013; Hsu et al., 2013; Pattanayak et al., 2013) , we searched the genome 

Cell Stem Cell
CRISPR-Cas9-Mediated Genetic Correction in Mice for sites with a minimum of 14 consecutive nucleotides of shared identity with the authentic target sequence. This led to the identification of a total of 10 potential ''off-target'' sites (Table  S2 ). DNA sequencing of PCR products amplified from these genomic sites showed no mutations at these loci in the majority of the repaired mice (10 out of 12). For the remaining 2 mice, off-target mutations were detected at 1 of the 10 potential off-target sites (Table  S2 ). These results are consistent with previous observations that injection of CRISPR-Cas9 into mouse and rat embryos results in genetic-modified animals carrying off-target mutations in only rare instances  (Li et al., 2013a (Li et al., , 2013b;; Wang et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2013) . Finally, we analyzed the fertility of repaired mice by mating them with WT mice. Progeny were obtained from four cataract-free mice carrying the Crygc gene that was corrected through various mechanisms (two via HDR using information from the endogenous WT allele, one via NHEJ, and one via HDR using information from Olig-2) (Figure  1J  and Figures  S1C  and S2I ). DNA sequencing of the progeny showed that the pups carried the repaired Crygc allele originated from their parents (Figure  1K  and Figures  S1D  and S2J ), indicating that the corrected allele could be successfully transmitted to the next generation through the germline. In summary, we have demonstrated that the CRISPR-Cas9 system can be used to cure a genetic disease in mouse by directly correcting the genetic defect through NHEJ-or HDRmediated gene editing. In the future, it would be of interest to investigate whether similar gene-correction strategies could be used for mutation correction in a setting related to human diseases, such as human stem cells.