Introduction
In epidemiological studies of joint diseases, where results from different observers are to be compared, it is common to estimate the degree of variation between the observers;l'Z if the variation is small, then the conclusions drawn from such studies will have more credibility than if it is great. Now that epidemiological techniques are increasingly being applied to palaeopathology it seemed important to make some assessment of the extent of inter-observer variation amongst its practitioners when scoring diseased joints, since to the best of our knowledge this has not been attempted before.

Materials and methods
Each of the specimens used in the study (and illustrated in Figure  1 ) was considered to have 1047-482x/91/010049-08$05.00 @ 1991 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd the features of osteoarthritis by the criteria that we have published b e f ~r e . ~ Briefly, these criteria state that osteoarthritis is present when there is eburnation on the joint surface or, in the absence of eburnation, when two of the following are present: marginal osteophytes, new bone on the joint surface, pitting on the joint surface or deformation of the joint contour. Ten specimens were chosen to illustrate some or all of these changes at as many different joints as possible. The specimens (and joints) were as follows:  The participants in the study were all delegates at the VIIIth European Meeting of the Paleopathology Association, which was held in Cambridge from 19 to 22 September 1990. At the start of the conference, the purpose of the study was explained and delegates were invited to take part. They were asked to grade each of t h e five diagnostic criteria noted above for each specimen as being present o r absent; if they considered that changes were present in the joint, then each was to be scored on a three point scale from 1 (least severe) to 3 (most severe). Finally, they were asked to state whether or not they considered the specimen to have osteoarthritis. Although we did not ask the participants to give their names, we did ask them to give their principal discipline (anthropologist, palaeopathologist or other) and to state their level of expertise (beginner, experienced or very experienced).

Results
Of the 83 delegates (excluding the authors of this paper), 38 (45.8%) took part in the trial. Of Table  1 . Concordance scores in inter-observer error study. these, nine gave their principal discipline as anthropologist, and 13 as palaeopathologist; seven were in different disciplines and nine gave no response. Eleven of the 38 participants ranked themselves as beginners, 13 as experienced and six as very experienced; eight were too unsure of themselves to respond. Since one of the aims of the exercise was to measure differences between beginners and those who considered themselves experienced, we analysed the data only from the 11 beginners and the 19 experts, grouping together those who were 'experienced' and 'very experienced'. We did not analyse the data according to discipline since the numbers within each group were too small. For each of the 10 specimens there were five criteria to be scored, giving an overall matrix of 50 scores. For each of the 50 cells we calculated what we termed a concordance score, which was simply taken as the largest number agreeing a particular grade expressed as the total number scoring (which in a very few cases was less than the absolute number in the group). The mean concordance scores were calculated for each diagnostic criterion and also for the five criteria Inter-observation Variation in Coding Osteoarthritis 5 3 for each specimen and the results are shown in Table  1 . It should be noted that the beginners and experts did not always agree on which grade should be allocated to each criterion, but this was not taken into account when analysing the results; our interest was only in the degree to which the two groups agreed on their grading, not in whether it was the same grading in both cases. Agreement was clearly easier to achieve for some changes than for others and concordance scores tended to be higher when scoring eburnation and new bone on the joint surface than for the other changes. It was interesting to note that the experts had lower mean concordance scores than the beginners for three of the five criteria and a higher mean score only for eburnation, but this was the only significant difference (t = 2.75, p < 0.05). Higher mean scores were achieved on six of the specimens by the experts but in only one case (specimen 5) was the difference significant (t = 4.72, p < O . O l ) . As a second stage in the analysis, we decided to compare the numbers in each group registering change or no change for each of the criteria. In this instance we were not interested in how many agreed on the grade but merely whether change was present or absent. The number scoring change as present in each cell was subtracted from the total number responding and then expressed as a percentage. If all the group scored change as being present, then the percentage was zero; if they all scored it as being absent, the percentage was 100. These data are shown for each criterion and for each specimen in Figure  2 . It should be noted when looking at these figures that the measure of agreement increases at both extremes and is least at 50% since then the group is equally split as to whether change is present or absent. In general, agreement is reasonable although there are some notable exceptions. For example, there was a good deal of disagreement about whether or not specimens 4 and 7 had marginal osteophyte; whether specimens 2 and 5 had pitting on the joint surface and whether specimens 3,5,7 and 8 had new bone on the joint surface. In only very few cases was there unanimity that change was present or absent, and the experts were no more likely to agree amongst themselves than the beginners (see Table  2 ). Finally, we looked to see the proportions who considered that the joints had osteoarthritis. The experts were unanimous for three of the specimens, 1, 3 and 6, whereas the beginners were unanimous only about specimen 6 (see Figure  3  ) . There was only one dissenting voice amongst the experts for specimens 5, 7 and 8 and amongst the beginners for 1 , 2 , 5 and 8. The greatest degree of dissent amongst the experts was shown over specimen 9 and for the beginners over specimen 7. In only a single case (specimen 7), however, was the difference between experts and beginners statistically significant ( p < 0.05).

Discussion
We think that is the first study of inter-observer variation that has been carried out in palaeopathology and the results are not entirely comforting. We chose to carry out the study using bones that showed some or all the features of osteoarthritis on the grounds that osteoarthritis is the most common disease found in human skeletal remains and so most experienced palaeopathologists would have had plenty of practice at observing it, and also because we thought that it was comparatively easy to tell whether or not the characteristic changes were present, whatever the cause of the changes may have been.  What has emerged from the study is that more than half the observers. What is even there is seldom complete agreement as to more disturbing, however, is that experts selwhether pathological changes are present and dom achieve more consistent results than beginthat agreement on the severity of the changes ners. Of course we have to enter the caveat here that are seen is seldom likely to be achieved by that the self-rating may not have been entirely accurate and that some bias is very likely in the direction of experienced workers under-rating themselves, but w e have no means of checking this since the study was carried o u t anonymously. There was also considerable disagreement when it came to attributing the diagnosis of osteoarthritis to the specimens. We choose all ten as meeting our published criteria €or osteoarthritis in palaeopathological material and so, to some extent, this was a test of the acceptance of our criteria. As it was, the experts were unanimous on three specimens only ( 1 , 3 and 6 ) and the beginners were unanimous only about specimen 6 . There was a significant difference in the number of experts and beginners only over the diagnosis of specimen 7; 94.7% of the experts considered it to have osteoarthritis but only 54.5% of the beginners. Considering this result, and some of the other results pertaining to specimen 7, it seems likely that some of the participants were scoring the wrong joint. The inferior facet joint (shown in Figure  1 ) had very obvious eburnation and scoring on the joint surface and could not possibly have been mistaken for anything other than osteoarthritis; the fact that so many people did misdiagnose it suggests that they were actually scoring the normal, superior facet joint; this, at least, is our most charitable explanation. In general, there was better agreement about the diagnosis when eburnation was present, although three of the experts and two of the beginners did not diagnose specimen 10 as having osteoarthritis even though there was an obvious area of eburnation on the inferior surface of the head of this metatarsal. O n e practical outcome of this study must be that greater efforts will need to be taken to agree on the criteria >for the classification of pathological changes in palaeopathology. What is required for palaeopathological work is the development of operational definitions, since it is not valid entirely t o rely on either clinical or radiological diagnoses. For example, we have shown that radiology is not reliable in detecting changes that are evident to the palaeopathologist.' Finally, these results demonstrate that great care must be taken when comparing disease frequencies between studies unless the authors cite the criteria used in arriving at their classifications o r use a common, agreed source of reference.