Introduction
Despite the fact that the immune repertoire of healthy individuals contains autoreactive T cells and natural antibodies, under normal circumstances autoimmune diseases do not develop. For example, in the repertoire of healthy humans  [1]  and non-human primates  [2]  myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein-reactive T cells exist that can induce autoimmune encephalomyelitis in marmosets when activated in vitro  [2, 3] . Hence, despite their silencing, these autoreactive T cells clearly maintain the ability to mediate autoimmune disease. Thus, as well as central tolerance other mechanisms must be active to prevent autoimmune diseases. One of the most important factors capable of preventing autoimmune diseases is the activity of regulatory T cells (Treg). Over the past few years, several subsets of Treg have been identified, including natural CD4 + CD25 + Foxp3 + T cells and acquired regulatory T cells such as regulatory type 1 cells (Tr1) and Th3 cells  [4] . Nevertheless, in order to unravel the pathogenesis of autoimmune conditions, we must still better understand how Treg cells function in autoimmune disease, particularly since Treg cell transfer might be exploited as a tool in immunotherapy for autoimmune diseases  [5] . Tr1 cells are defined by their ability to produce high levels of IL-10, moderate amounts of TGF-b and IFN-c, and no IL-2 or IL-4. In addition, they also have a poor proliferative capacity  [6, 7] . Moreover, Tr1 cells display a memory phenotype, and they can suppress naive and memory Th1 or Th2 responses through the production of IL-10. The suppressive effects of Tr1 cells differentiated in vitro are remarkably potent, and fewer than 4000 Tr1 cells are capable of suppressing the proliferation of 50 000 CD4 + T cells by 50%  [8] . Tr1 cells participate in the maintenance of peripheral tolerance by suppressing the activation of autoreactive T cells  [9, 10] . Tr1 cells can be generated in vitro from CD4 + cells by stimulation with high doses of IL-10, alone or in conjunction with IFN-a  [11, 12] , by adding vitamin D and dexamethasone  [13]  or by stimulating CD46 on CD4 + cells with specific monoclonal antibodies  [14, 15] . By contrast, generation of Tr1 cells is inhibited by OX40L  [16] . Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disease in which activated T and B cells infiltrate the central nervous system, provoking demyelination and axonal damage, which produces significant neurological disability  [17] . To date, the primary antigens against which the immune response is directed in MS remain unknown, but immunological dysfunction has been identified in patients with MS  [18] . Impairment of suppressor cell function has classically been demonstrated in patients with MS  [19] , and a few years ago, the functional impairment of natural CD4 + CD25 + Foxp3 + Treg cells has also been demonstrated  [20] . Recently, Astier et al.  [21]  demonstrated that Tr1 function is also impaired in patients with MS. Moreover, the expression of the immunosuppressor cytokine IL-10 is diminished in MS patients  [22, 23] , in accordance with previous studies describing fewer IL-10-secreting peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Interestingly, there is a reduction in the expression of IL-10 but elevated numbers of PBMC expressing IL-10 transcripts before clinical relapse in MS  [24] , and there is a correlation between IL-10 levels and IgG in the cerebrospinal fluid of MS patients  [25] . Engineered Th2/Tr1 cells that produce high levels of IL-10 prevent epitope spreading and ameliorate the disease course in animal models of MS  [26] . However, it is unknown whether the functional activity of IL-10 in MS is preserved, and attempts to treat MS patients with IL-10 have not been successful to date. In order to explore the functionality of Tr1 regulatory function in MS, we assessed the ex vivo induction of the Tr1 phenotype and the response of CD4 + cells to the IL-10 produced by these cells in patients with MS. We found that CD4 + cells from MS patients were less disposed to differentiate into a Tr1 cell phenotype ex vivo and that, in addition, these cells produce less IL-10. Importantly, CD4 + cells from MS patients were more resistant to suppression by IL-10 because the IL-10R signaling cascade is defective in MS patients.

Results


In vitro generation of CD46-induced Tr1 cells is impaired in MS patients
In healthy controls (n = 8), CD4 + cells stimulated in vitro with anti-CD46 + anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies for 3 days acquired a Tr1 phenotype (Fig.  1 ). The presence of surface CD25 and CD45RO in these cells increased by up to 68 and 63%, respectively (Fig.  1A ), while the intracellular levels of IL-10 rose up to 27% and the cells secreted up to 3566 pg/mL IL-10 protein (Fig.  1B ; p <0.05 in all cases). Unstimulated cells did not augment the expression of these markers of activation and they did not produce higher levels of IL-10 after 3 days in culture (data not shown). Indeed, stimulation of CD4 + cells increased the expression of IL-10 and IFN-c RNA (p <0.05 in both cases) but not that of IL-2 (Fig.  1C ). Moreover, we assessed whether such CD4 + Tcell cultures remain stable over time and whether Tr1 cells released large amounts of IL-10 upon further stimulation. The same CD46-induced Tr1 induction protocol was applied to cells from five healthy control (HC) individuals and a second stimulation was applied 10 days later with an anti-CD3 rather than the anti-CD46 antibody. When the Tr1 phenotype was assessed at different intervals, we found that after the first stimulation the majority of the cells had developed an activation and memory phenotype. Moreover, they increased the release of IL-10, the production of which peaked at day 3 and decreased over the following 10 days. Over the next 7 days, the Tr1 cells maintained the activation and memory phenotype, but they produced less IL-10. After a second stimulation 10 days later, the majority of the cells showed a CD25 + CD45RO + activation/memory phenotype (65%; Fig.  1D ) and they also augmented the levels of both intracellular (Fig.  1D ) and secreted IL-10 protein (Fig.  1E ; p <0.05 in all cases). Finally, we assessed whether Tr1 cells acted as regulatory Tcells, by assessing the capacity of the secreted cytokines (mainly IL-10) to suppress the proliferation of CD4 + cells stimulated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies. We found that the supernatants from Tr1 cell cultures, containing high levels of IL-10 (in the range of 5580-7533 pg/mL), as well as recombinant IL-10, were able to suppress the proliferation of CD4 + Tcells (Fig.  1F ; p <0.001). This suppression was impaired in the presence of the anti-IL-10 antibody, confirming that the suppression was mediated by IL-10 (Fig.  1F ). Thus, in accordance with earlier data  [14] , we confirm that CD46 stimulation of CD4 + cells induces a Tr1-like phenotype and that this phenotype is stable in culture for 20 days, although IL-10 production is dependent on further TCR stimulation. When the same CD46-induced Tr1 induction protocol was applied to CD4 + cells from untreated patients with MS (n = 11), we found that there was a similar increase in the expression of the CD25 and CD45RO activation and memory markers, as well as in intracellular and secreted IFN-c (Fig.  2A, B ). However, both the intracellular and secreted levels of IL-10 produced by Tr1 cells from MS patients were significantly lower at day 3 than those from HC (Fig.  2A, C ; p <0.05 in both cases). Because CD46 have a pleiotropic activity in the immune system that strongly influences T cell activation and function  [27] , we compared the levels of CD46 in cells isolated from MS patients and HC. No differences were found in the levels of CD46 expression between MS patients and HC (HC: 70.5%; MS: 72.3%) (Fig.  2A , Table  1 ). Thus, our results suggest that Tr1 activity is impaired in MS patients.

CD4 + cells from MS patients are hyporesponsive to the suppressive activity of IL-10
Because IL-10 is the mediator of Tr1 cell immunomodulatory activity, we assessed whether the Tr1 activity contributed to peripheral tolerance in MS patients to the same extent as in HC. We studied the response of CD4 + cells from MS patients to IL-10 produced by Tr1 cells in vitro. We performed suppression assays on CD4 + cells stimulated with anti-CD3 antibodies using the supernatant from Tr1 from HC or recombinant IL-10. We found that in contrast to CD4 + from HC, proliferation of CD4 + from MS patients was not inhibited by the supernatant conditioned by Tr1 cells or recombinant IL-10 (Fig.  2D ). Thus, these results suggest that the immunosuppressive activity of IL-10 is defective in MS patients. Moreover, our findings help to explain why clinical trials with IL-10 in MS patients have failed to show an effect in preventing disease activity  [28] .

Defective regulation of IL-10 signaling in MS patients
Since we found that CD4 + cells from MS patients were more resistant to the immunosuppressive activity of IL-10, we studied the IL-10 signaling pathway to identify at which point signaling was impaired. We first measured the ex vivo expression of IL-10, IL-10RA, STAT1, STAT3 and SOCS3 in PBMC from HC and MS patients, and we found that PBMC from MS patients expressed higher levels of SOCS3 transcripts than HC (Fig.  3A , p = 0.008). Suppressor of cytokine signaling (Socs)-3 is a potent suppressor of cytokine production that regulates the negative feedback on IL-10 production after IL-10R stimulation  [28] . Hence, the increased levels of SOCS3 transcripts might inhibit IL-10 production. Accordingly, we investigated the kinetics of gene expression in CD4 + cells stimulated with IL-10 for 12-24 h. We found a significant increase in the expression of mRNA encoding IL-10RA (p = 0.022), Stat-1 (p = 0.03), and Stat-3 (p = 0.034) in PBMC from MS patients but not from HC 24 h after IL-10 stimulation. Again, SOCS3 transcripts were also augmented in MS patients when compared to the baseline levels of expression in HC. However, the kinetics of expression in PBMC from both MS and HC groups was similar (Fig.  3B ; p = 0.1). Protein phosphorylation is a critical process in IL-10 signaling  [28, 29] . For this reason, we evaluated the phosphorylation of Stat-1, Stat-3 and Socs-3 in PBMC from MS patients and HC by flow cytometry. In HC we found that, after stimulation of PBMC with IL-10, the phosphorylation levels of Stat-1, Stat-3 and Socs-3 rise above baseline levels (Fig.  4A ). However, in MS patients we found that Stat-3 showed a different kinetics, with lower levels of Stat-3 phosphorylation upon IL-10 stimulation (Fig.  4A ; p = 0.03). Indeed, we analyzed which were the cell subtypes responsible for such behavior. We found that both CD4 + and CD8 + cells but not CD56 + , CD14 + and CD19 + cell populations showed an impaired phosphorylation of Stat-3 (data not shown). By Western blot, we confirmed the decreased phosphor-ylation of Stat-3 in PBMC from MS patients stimulated with IL-10 (Fig.  4B ). Finally, we performed an IL-10 dose-response by analyzing the phosphorylation of Stat-1, Stat-3 and Socs-3 after stimulation with increasing doses of IL-10. We found that patients and controls display a similar Stat-1 and Socs-3 phosphorylation kinetics when using different doses of IL-10, but we found a trend for a different kinetics in Stat-3 phosphorylation, showing a decreased response to IL-10 stimulation in MS patients (Fig.  4C ; p = 0.06). In summary, our findings suggest that IL-10 signaling is defective in patients with MS. The most common drug used to treat MS is IFN-b  [17] . It has been shown that IFN-b therapy increases the levels of IL-10 in MS patients  [30] , suggesting that one of the mechanisms of action of IFN-b treatment may be to promote the activity of immunosuppressive cytokines. Because we found that the response to IL-10 is impaired in MS patients, we assessed whether IFN-b might revert such a status and in this way become a useful adjuvant for Tr1 cell immunotherapy. We initially measured the ex vivo expression of IL-10RA, STAT1, STAT3 and SOCS3 in MS patients treated with IFN-b. We found that patients treated with IFN-b have higher levels of STAT1 and STAT3 transcripts than HC (Fig.  3A ; p = 0.019 and 0.038, respectively), and that there was a trend towards higher levels of IL-10 transcripts when compared to HC (Fig.  3A ; p = 0.06). Indeed, MS patients treated with IFN-b displayed higher levels of IL-10RA transcripts than untreated patients (Fig.  3A ; p = 0.015). The rise in IL-10 transcripts in PBMC from MS patients treated with IFN-b has been related to the fact that IFN-b therapy inhibits the proliferation of myelin-reactive T cells, increasing the frequency of other T cell populations, including Treg  [30] . In the kinetic analysis, we found that patients treated with IFN-b did not differ significantly from untreated patients (Fig.  3B ). Moreover, we analyzed the effect of IFN-b therapy on the IL-10 signaling cascade by flow cytometry. We found that phosphorylation of Stat-1, Stat-3 and Socs-3 was similar in IFN-b-treated and untreated patients, although we found a nonsignificant difference in levels of Stat-3 phosphorylation at 60 min. These results suggest that IFN-b therapy is unable to recover the response to IL-10 in vitro (Fig.  4D ).

Discussion
Recently, Astier et al. reported the impairment of Tr1 cell function in patients with MS  [21] . They found that Tr1 cells from MS patients produce lower amounts of IL-10 but that they retain their capacity to proliferate and to produce IFN-c. They found this defective response both in IFN-b-treated and untreated MS patients. In our study, we found similar findings because we also  CD4 cells from patients with MS were significantly less responsive to suppression when cultured with supernatants from Tr1 cell cultures from HC or recombinant IL-10. This finding suggests that effector cells in MS patients may be less amenable to suppression. Although such differences might be attributable to differences in the composition of populations taken from the MS and HC groups, we found no differences in the CD4 + phenotype assessed by cytometry between MS and HC patients at the baseline. Because we did not measure the phenotypic characteristics of the different subpopulations of T cells and the levels of IL-10RB, and we did not sort for CD45RA cells, we could not rule out some other mechanisms explaining the poor response to IL-10 in MS patients. Our findings suggest that the critical step impairing the response to IL-10 in MS patients is the lack of phosphorylation of Stat-3. Stat-3 activation is the main mediator of the IL-10 response  [28] . Suppression of Stat-3 activation inhibits the suppression of MHC class II expression mediated by IL-10  [31] . Because antigen presentation is a critical step in the generation of autoimmune responses, the failure of IL-10 in modulating this process might predispose to the generation of an autoimmune response. In addition, Stat-3 phosphorylation in macrophages is induced after vagus nerve stimulation through acetylcholine receptor signaling  [32] . Thus, the impairment in the neuromodulatory activity of the parasympathic system in patients with MS  [33, 34]  might prevent the activation of the IL-10 pathway in patients with MS. Finally, the lack of Stat-3 phosphorylation might impair the negative feedback of the constitutive high levels of Socs-3 that repress IL-10. However, the complexity of the regulatory network involved in IL-10 signaling will require further experiments to clarify the mechanistic basis of this finding. Because T cells can be considered as minifactories that might release the right combinations of cytokines in the right place and time, and they are able to sense the tissue environment, they seem to be an ideal candidate for immunotherapy. In this respect, Tr1 cells might be a good candidate for cell immunotherapy for autoimmune diseases since they can be obtained in humans by stimulating CD4 + cells with different protocols. Moreover, their mechanism of action, mainly based on IL-10 secretion, is well enough defined in order to monitor the response to therapy. Another advantage of using these cells is that the target antigen does not need to be known, as is indeed the case in most autoimmune diseases. However, our results and previous studies suggest that Tr1 function and IL-10R signaling are impaired in patients. The IL-10R signaling impairment would conceptually be expected to limit therapies that aim to merely increase IL-10 levels, and for this reason, Tr1 cell immunotherapy is not immediately advisable if such impairment is not reverted. The lack of response to IL-10 in MS patients might be due to the impairment of IL-10 signaling, including the presence of increased levels of Socs-3 and the poorer phosphorylation of Stat-3 after IL-10 stimulation. The beneficial effects of IFN-b therapy might be due to the partial recovery of the response of CD4 + cells to IL-10. However, results from the study by Astier et al.  [21]  and  our study suggest that IFN-b is unable to recover Tr1 function. However, recent studies showed that a combination of dexamethasone and vitamin D3, a regimen that induces Tr1 cells in vitro, was able to revert the resistance to corticosteroid therapy in patients with asthma, and restoring levels of IL-10  [35] , indicating that Tr1 dysfunction might be reversible, at least in patients with asthma. It still remains unclear whether IL-10R signaling and Tr1 dysfunction is either a primary or secondary phenomenon, as it has been suggested that autoimmune diseases might arise because of the deficiencies in Treg function  [36] . Alternatively, during autoimmune diseases, the Treg activity may become exhausted. In either case, the reconstitution of Treg function in patients with autoimmune disease might improve the disease course. Further studies will be required to assess whether adoptive transfer of Tr1 cells in combination with immunomodulatory therapies may be a useful treatment for MS, as well as for other autoimmune diseases.

Methods and patients


Subjects
We studied 41 patients with MS  [37]  and 21 sex-and agematched HC, all of whom provided their informed consent. The clinical data of the MS patients is shown in Table  2 . The number of individuals used for each experiment is described in the Results section and in each figure legend. For the Tr1 induction experiments, patients were not receiving any immunomodulatory or immunosuppressive drug. This work was approved by the Ethical Committee of the University of Navarra and informed consent was obtained from all participating subjects.

Media and antibodies
Cells were maintained in RPMI medium with 10% heatinactivated fetal calf serum and 200 mM L-glutamine, in the presence or absence of recombinant human IL-2 (BioSource International). We assessed three different anti-CD46 antibodies: mAb GB24, mAb TRA-2-10 (both of them generously provided by C. Kemper and J. Atkinson, University of Washington), and the commercial anti-CD46 mAb (RDI-CBL488 from Research Diagnostics Inc., US). We found similar activity for each of these antibodies when analyzing the generation of CD46-induced Tr1-like cells (Table  3 ). The mAb against human CD3 (HIT3a) and CD28 (CD28.2), the neutralizing mAb to human IL-10 (JES3-9D7), IL-2 (MQ1-17H12), IL-12 (C8.6), the mAb against human CD4 (RPA-T4; PerCP-conjugated), CD25 (2A3; FITC-conjugated), CD45RA (HI100), CD45RO (UCHL1; PE-conjugated), IL-10 (PE-conjugated), and IFN-c (PE-conjugated) were all obtained from Becton Dickinson (BD, San Diego, CA). The antibodies against Stat-3 and phospho-Stat-3 were obtained from Santa Cruz (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, USA), while that raised against actin was purchased from Sigma (Germany). CD46-induced Tr1 cell stimulation CD4 + lymphocytes were purified from whole blood by separating mononuclear cells with Ficoll (Amersham) and then applying negative selection using the Miltenyi CD4 + T cell isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotec, Germany). Only samples in which the selection process reached >95% CD4 + cells were used. In vitro primary stimulation was carried out overnight in 96-well culture plates coated with anti-CD46 (5 lg/mL), anti-CD3 (10 lg/mL), anti-CD28 (5 lg/mL) and anti-IL-12 (5 lg/mL) antibodies as described in Kemper et al.  [14] . CD4 + cells (2 Â 10 5 cells per well) were cultured for 3-20 days. Subsequently, the cells were washed and expanded for another 6 days in medium supplemented with 40 U/mL human IL-2 (R&D Systems). On the 7 th day, the cells were subjected to secondary stimulation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 but not with anti-CD46 antibodies. All experiments were carried out at least three times, and each procedure for activation was analyzed in triplicate.

Suppression assays
CD4 + cell stimulation was carried out in 96-well culture plates coated with anti-CD3 (10 lg/mL) and anti-CD28 (10 lg/mL)  antibodies. CD4 + T cells (2 Â 10 5 per well) were incubated in triplicate in the presence of CD46-induced Tr1 culture supernatants from HC, which contain high levels of IL-10 (5580-7533 pg/mL), rIL-10 (20 ng/mL; R&D Systems) and/ or anti-IL-10 antibodies (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). The concentration of Tr1 supernatant was adjusted to obtain the same concentration as rIL-10 (20 ng/mL). After 7 days, 0.5 mCi of [ 3 H]thymidine was added to each well, and 5 h later, the cells were harvested and the thymidine incorporated into the cells in each well was determined by scintillation counting. The suppression index was determined as cpm incorporated into culture with Tr1 cell culture supernatant/ cpm incorporated into culture with media only.

IL-10 stimulation assays
PBMC (2 Â 10 5 cells/well) were stimulated with IL-10 (20 ng/ mL; R&D Systems) in 96-well culture plates for up to 24 h. Experiments were repeated at least three times, and each experimental condition was analyzed in triplicate.

Flow cytometry analysis
Cells were phenotyped by three-color flow cytometry (FACScan) according to the expression of CD25, CD45, CD46, CTLA4 and the intracellular cytokines iIL-10 and iIFN-c. For intracellular cytokine staining, cells (2 Â 10 5 cells/well) were activated with immobilized anti-CD3 antibodies over 24 or 72 h. Brefeldin A was added for the last 4-8 h in culture before the cells were fixed (Fix and Perm; Caltag), stained with intracellular antibodies (anti-iIL-10-PE or anti-iIFN-c-PE) and analyzed by flow cytometry. The phenotypic analysis of PBMC before CD4 + cell purification (day 0) from the HC and MS patients studied is shown in Table  1 .

Phosphorylation analysis by flow cytometry
PBMC were incubated at 37 C in RPMI 1640 at 10 6 cells/mL and stimulated at different times (15, 30, 60 min) or left unstimulated with 20 ng/mL human recombinant IL-10 (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). For the dose-response experiments, the cells were stimulated with increasing doses of rIL-10 (10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 500 ng/mL). Phosphorylated Stat-1, Stat-3 and Socs-3 were detected by flow cytometry as described by He et al.  [38] . Briefly, the cells were fixed with parafomaldehyde, permeabilized with methanol and stained with PE-conjugated anti-pStat-1, Alexa-Fluor 488-conjugated anti-pStat-3 (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) and APCconjugated anti-Socs-3 antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and then analyzed with a flow cytometer. Phosphorylation increase is plotted as the mean relative activation of two samples normalized to the activity of the unstimulated control at zero minutes.

ELISA
We assessed the secretion of IL-10 and IFN-c in the supernatants of CD4 + cell cultures by ELISA (BD Opteia TM ELISA kit), following the manufacturer's instructions. Real-time quantitative PCR PBMC were isolated using Ficoll-Paque (Pharmacia Biotech) and were immediately submerged in RNAlater RNA Stabilization Reagent (Qiagen) to preserve gene expression patterns. Total RNA was isolated using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). During RNA purification, DNA was removed with a DNase treatment using the RNase-Free DNase Set (Qiagen). Synthesis of cDNA from total RNA was performed using the High-Capacity cDNA Archive Kit (Applied Biosystems). Primer sequences and target-specific fluorescence-labeled TaqMan probes were purchased from Applied Biosystems (TaqMan Gene Expression Assays). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed with the DNA Engine Opticon2 (MJ Research). Each sample was run in triplicate, and in each plate the target and the endogenous control gene (GAPDH) were amplified and placed in different wells. Cycle threshold (c(t)) values were acquired with Opticon Monitor 2.01 software (MJ Research). The normalized gene expression was calculated using the Q-Gene software application  [39] . The mean normalized expression (MNE) was given by calculating the average c(t) values of the triplicate of the target, and of the reference.

Western blot analysis
Western blots were performed as described previously  [40]  and the membranes were probed with both the corresponding anti-Stat-3 and anti-phosphorylated Stat-3 antibodies. Equal loading of gels and the specificity of the effects observed was demonstrated by hybridizing membranes with antibodies specific for Actin and Stat-3.

Statistical analysis
The differences between groups were assessed with the Mann-Whitney U test. Differences over time were assessed using the Friedman test and two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). The significance of the difference between each pair of flow cytometry curves was calculated by two-way ANOVA. Because real-time PCR measurements are highly skewed, we performed a logarithmic transformation for the treatment of nonnormality. Normality was assessed with the Kolmorogov-Smirnof test, and all statistical tests were performed using the SPSS 11.0 software.