INTRODUCTION


Haemagglutinins
are glycoprotein components of influenza virus membranes which bind virus particles to cells and in addition appear to be involved in the membrane fusion which allows transfer of the virus transcription complex into cells (for reviews see  Compans and Klenk, 1979; Ward, 1982) . Antibodies against haemagglutinins neutralize virus infectivity and studies on antigenicity using monoclonil antibodies indicate that haemagglutinins contain a small number of nonoverlapping antibody binding regions  (Gerhard et al., 1981; Webster eC al., 1980; Jackson et aL, 1982) . Analyses of the amino acid sequences of haemagglutinins of antigenic variants indicate that antibodies of different specificities recognize different amino acid residues in the distal region of the haemagglutinin molecule  (Laver et aL, 1979; 1980; Both and Sleigh, 1981; Caton et al, 1982; Daniels et al, 1983) . The amino acids recognized have generally been assumed to contribute to the particular antibody binding site. We present here evidence obtained directly by electron microscopy of haemagglutinin-antibody complexes that this is the case for ant.i-

METHODS


Haemagglutinin
preparation Soluble preparations of the haemagglutinin (BHA) from X-31 (H3N2)  (Kilbourne, 1969)  were made by bromelain digestion of purified virus particles as described by  Brand and Skehel (1972) . Monoclonal antibody preparation. Balb/ c mice were immunized by intraperitoneal injection of 8000 HA units of purified virus. Eight weeks later they received 32,000 BHA units of virus intraperitoneally and intravenously. Three days later their spleens were removed and the cells fused with SP2/ 0-Ag14 myeloma cells  (Shulman et d, 1978)  as described by  Kohler and Milstein (1975, 1976) . Hybrid cell culture conditions were based on those described by Fazekas de St.  Groth and Scheidegger (1980) . Antibodies were purilied by allinity chromatography on protein A-sepharose CL-4B (Pharmacia). Nucleotide sequence analyses. Sequences were determined using the dideoxynucleotide chain terminating procedure of  Sanger et al. (1977)    Note. Antigenie variants of X-31 were obtained by mixing equal volumes of allantoie fluid-containing virus and undiluted ascitic fluid-containing monoclonal antibodies and using the mixture as inoculum. Variants obtained were cloned by limit dilution. Nucleotide sequences were determined as described under Methods. These were the only changes detected in the HAi regions of the HA genes. dTTP, 0.0004 M; human placenta RNase inhibitor (Bethesda Research Labs.) 3 units; reverse transeriptase, 5 units {Life Sciences); virus RNA, '7 pg; and either ddATP, ddCTP, ddGTP, or ddTTP, 0.00025 M. After 120 min at 42' products were analyzed on polyacrylamide gels containing 8% acrylamide. Reactions were primed using 32P-5'-labeled synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides, 5 pmol (Pate1 et al, 1982) numbered according to the sequence of X-31 haemagglutinin cDNA  (Verhoeyen et a& 1980) : 5-AAAGCAGGGG-14; 191-TGC-TACTGAGCT-202; 345~CGCAGCAAAG-354; 493-GCAAAAGGGG-502; 623~TCA-CCACCCG-632; '7'77-TGGACAATAG-786. The nucleotide sequence changes determined in the HA1 regions of appropriate antigenic variants, which serve to define the specificity of the monoclonal antibodies used, are given in Table  1 . Electron microscopy. BHA was dilnted in PBS (pH 7.2) to 50 pg/ml for optimum spreading on carbon support films. Antibody was added in increasing amounts until only a few molecules remained unbound to BHA after about 5 min equilibration. BHA-antibody complex suspensions were adsorbed to thin carbon films freshly stripped from mica, floated on a 1% w/v solution of sodium silicotungstate (pH 7.0) and then air dried. Micrographs were taken under minimum dose conditions known from analyses of periodic specimens to preserve detail below 1.5 nm; defocus was such that phase contrast was transferred in a continuous band down to about 1.0 nm  (Wrigley et al., 1983) . amination of the other antibody combinations although the position and binding angle of HC3; HC19, and HC45 are less easy to distinguish from one another than from HC31.

DISCUSSION
These results directly demonstrate the sites of binding of four monoclonal antibodies of different specificities to the X-31 BHA. That the sites are different in detail for the different antibodies may be deduced from the observations that the angles formed between Fab regions and the BHA are constant and different for each antibody. The observation that these angles are constant irrespective of the type of complex observed, 1 + 1, 1 + 2,2 + 2, RHAantibody, etc., is allowed by the axial-rotation and flexing properties of the switch and hinge regions of the antibody molecules  (Wrigley et ab, 1983) . Differences in the sites of antibody binding on the BHA can also be observed directly even at this level of resolution (probably about 2 nm). For example HC45 clearly binds at a site away from an end of the BHA molecule whereas HC31 binds squarely on an end. This location of the HC31 antibody-binding site is supported by the observation of restricted complex formation. Only 1 + 1 and 2 + 1 BHAantibody complexes were seen (Fig.  3 ) presumably because of the binding of a second antibody to an unoccupied equivalent region of the BHA trimer is sterically prevented by the first antibody bound. The sites of antibody binding and the locations of amino acid substitutions in the BIIAs of antigenie variants can also be considered in relation to the thxee-dimensional structure of the BHA, Fig.  6 . These considerations indicate that the sites of amino acid substitution are in all four cases appropriately located to be involved directly in the antibody-binding sites. In the case of HC31 they also indicate the basis of the steric inhibition of the binding of a second antibody to the BHA. Since the three 198 residues recognized are only 15 A apart around the threefold axis of the trimer, the BHA is effectively monovalent at this site. The results therefore substantiate the positions of antigenic sites A, B, and E and in the ease of site B give an indication of the extent of this region at the distal tip of the BHA molecule. It would also be of interest to examine antibodies specific for sites C and D but we have not characterized antibodies prepared against X-31 virus which recognize amino acids in these sites.