internalized GPCR can indeed contribute to the acute G protein-mediated response 
10  . Evidence supporting these various latter hypotheses is indirect or subject to alternate interpretation, and it remains unknown if endosome-localized GPCR are even present in an active form. Here we describe the application of conformation-specific single domain antibodies (nanobodies) to directly probe activation of the β 2 -adrenoceptor, a prototypical GPCR  11  , and its cognate G protein, G s (ref. 12) in living mammalian cells. We show that the adrenergic agonist isoprenaline promotes receptor and G protein activation in the plasma membrane as expected, but also in the early endosome membrane; and that internalized receptors contribute to the overall cellular cyclic AMP response within several minutes after agonist application. These findings provide direct support for the hypothesis that canonical GPCR signalling occurs from endosomes as well as the plasma membrane, and suggest a versatile strategy for probing dynamic conformational change in vivo. Ligand binding to the extracellular surface of the β 2 -adrenoceptor (β 2 -AR) produces an activating conformational change in the receptor that promotes guanine nucleotide dissociation from the cytoplasmic GTP-binding protein Gα s ; this represents the critical biochemical event initiating classical GPCR signal transduction (Fig.  1a )  13  . Activated β 2 -ARs are substrates for phosphorylation and binding of β-arrestins, events which inhibit interaction with G proteins and promote endocytosis of receptors via clathrin-coated pits (CCPs)  14, 15  . Acute β 2 -AR Gα s signalling is thus traditionally thought to be restricted to the plasma membrane  14, 16, 17  . However, to our knowledge, this assumption has not been directly tested. To do so, we generated a biosensor of activated β 2 -AR based on a conformationspecific single-domain camelid antibody (Nb80) used in recent structural studies  18, 19  . We reasoned that this nanobody, which selectively binds the agonist-occupied β 2 -AR and is able to stabilize an activated receptor conformation when present in vitro at high concentration, might act as a sensor of receptor activation when expressed at relatively low concentration in intact cells (Fig.  1b ). This proved to be the case; in cells maintained in the absence of agonist, Nb80 fused to enhanced GFP (Nb80-GFP) localized to the cytoplasm and not with β 2 -ARs present in the plasma membrane(Fig.  1c , 0 min, top row; Pearson's coefficient = 0.135). Line scan analysis verified the cytoplasmic distribution of Nb80-GFP before β 2 -AR activation (Fig.  1d , top row) was as expected because the cytoplasmic concentration of Nb80-GFP achieved in our experiments (approximately equal to 20 nM) was considerably lower than the equilibrium dissociation constant estimated in vitro for Nb80 binding to purified β 2 -ARs in the absence of agonist (0.76 ± 0.14 µM; Supplementary Fig.  1a-d ). After application of the adrenergic agonist isoprenaline (10 µM), Nb80-GFP was rapidly recruited to the plasma membrane and co-localized there with β 2 -ARs (Fig.  1c , middle row; Pearson's coefficient = 0.625). Line scan analysis verified robust Nb80-GFP recruitment to the plasma membrane and concomitant depletion from the cytoplasm (Fig.  1d , middle row), consistent with the much higher affinity of Nb80 for isoprenaline-activated β 2 -ARs (2.9 ± 0.5 nM; Supplementary Fig.  1d ). Agonist-induced membrane recruitment of Nb80-GFP was specific because the D1 Dopamine receptor (DRD1), which is also G s -coupled but does not bind Nb80 in vitro (data not shown), failed to recruit Nb80-GFP to the plasma membrane in response to dopamine (10 µM) application (Supplementary Fig.  2 ). Furthermore, β 2 -AR-CFP and Nb80-YFP generated a pronounced fluorescence (Förster) resonance energy transfer (FRET) signal after isoprenaline application whereas DRD1-CFP did not (Supplementary Fig.  3a, b ). β 2 -AR internalization began 1 to 2 min after Nb80-GFP recruitment to the plasma membrane, indicated by the emergence of surface-labelled β 2 -AR in peripheral cytoplasmic vesicles. Nb80-GFP did not co-localize with β 2 -AR-containing endocytic vesicles upon first appearance (Fig.  1c , middle row, arrow in merged image points to an example) but was recruited at later time points (Fig.  1c , bottom row, Pearson's coefficient = 0.702; examples are indicated by arrowheads). Endosome recruitment of Nb80-GFP was evident by line scan analysis (Fig.  1d , bottom row; line scans are from the representative individual examples with further quantification in legend) and localized to EEA1-marked early endosomes (Pearson's coefficient = 0.846; Supplementary Fig.  4 ) through which β 2 -ARs iteratively cycle in the presence of agonist  20  . β 2 -AR-containing endosomes were initially devoid of Nb80-GFP and later acquired Nb80-GFP during their movement (Supplementary Videos 1 and 2). Interaction at endosomes was verified by β 2 -AR-CFP and Nb80-YFP normalized FRET (nFRET) (Supplementary Fig.  3c ). These results suggest that β 2 -AR activation initiates a precisely choreographed series of events: Nb80-GFP is first recruited from the cytoplasm to the plasma membrane, then β 2 -ARs internalize devoid of Nb80-GFP, followed by a second phase of Nb80-GFP recruitment to the internalized β 2 -ARs. Nb80-GFP recruitment to endosomes required β 2 -ARs because a phosphorylation-deficient mutant version of the β 2 -AR (β 2 AR-3S) that couples to Gα s but is impaired in agonistinduced endocytosis  21  recruited Nb80-GFP to the plasma membrane but produced much less recruitment to endosomes (Fig.  1e , top row). Nb80-GFP co-localized with β 2 -AR-3S after agonist-induced activation (Pearson's coefficient = 0.674) but this was largely restricted to the plasma membrane (line scan analysis in Fig.  1f  is representative; further quantification in the figure legend). Nb80-GFP membrane recruitment was also reversible because the biosensor returned to a cytoplasmic distribution after addition of the competitive antagonist CGP-12177 (Fig.  1e, f , middle and bottom rows; Pearson's coefficient = 0.106), verified by recovery of Nb80-GFP fluorescence intensity in the cytoplasm (Fig.  1g ; see also Supplementary Video 3). Thus, Nb80-GFP detected activated β 2 -ARs both in the plasma membrane and endosomes after acute agonist application. Discrete Nb80-GFP recruitment phases were clearly resolved by total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy that selectively detects events occurring in the plasma membrane and extending approximately equal to 100 nm into the peripheral cytoplasm  22  . First, within 2 min after agonist application, Nb80-GFP was progressively recruited to the plasma membrane in a diffuse distribution (Fig.  2a , compare first and second columns from left; quantification in Fig.  2b ). Nb80-GFP did not co-localize with β 2 -ARs when they clustered in relatively static punctae characteristic of receptor-containing CCPs  23  (Fig.  2a , third column). Second, over a period of several additional minutes, Nb80-GFP was recruited to a discrete population of highly mobile punctae (Fig.  2a , fourth column) representing peripheral β 2 -AR-containing endocytic vesicles  23  . Sequential TIRF imaging emphasized the distinction between relatively static β 2 -AR puncta not co-localizing with Nb80-GFP (Fig.  2c , arrowhead indicates an example) and mobile endosomes that did (Fig.  2c , arrow indicates a representative example; many are visible in Supplementary Video 4). Later recruitment of Nb80-GFP occurred rather suddenly, typically within approximately 5 s (Supplementary Video 5), as also evident in kymographs of individual endosome trajectories (Fig.  2d ). Ruling out potential artefacts of wavelengthdependent differences in TIRF microscopy illumination depth, later recruitment of the biosensor to endosomes was similarly observed when the excitation wavelengths used to detect receptor and biosensor were reversed (Fig.  2e ). Nb80-GFP did not detectably concentrate in CCPs labelled with either of two independent markers, the adaptor protein β-arrestin (Fig.  3a  and Supplementary Video 6) or the coat protein component clathrin light chain (Fig.  3b  and Supplementary Video 7). Representative examples are shown and this was verified across multiple cells and experiments (Pearson's coefficient = 0.365 and 0.319, respectively, with numbers of replicates specified in the legend). In contrast, and as expected based on previous work, extensive co-localization of β 2 -AR with β-arrestin was observed under the same conditions (Pearson's coefficient = 0.677). Separation of Nb80-GFP localization from that of either β-arrestin or clathrin was clear in line scans (bottom panels of Fig.  3a, b  were derived from the images shown and are representative; further quantification is in the legend). A simple interpretation is that Nb80-GFP associates with activated β 2 -ARs in the plasma membrane but then dissociates before receptors cluster in CCPs and internalize. This was surprising because β 2 -AR clustering in CCPs occurs much more rapidly  23  than the overall reversal rate of Nb80-GFP recruitment observed after agonist washout in intact cells (Fig.  1g ), or the kinetics of Nb80 dissociation from purified β 2 -ARs in vitro (Supplementary Fig.  1b, e ). One possibility is that Nb80-GFP dissociation is accelerated during the clustering process, by mechanisms such as by receptor phosphorylation or steric exclusion mediated by β-arrestins or other CCP-associated components. An alternative possibility is that the fraction of β 2 -ARs that have bound Nb80-GFP in the plasma membrane by the time of the clustering reaction are unable to enter CCPs, and only those β 2 -ARs not initially bound to Nb80-GFP in the plasma membrane are able to cluster in CCPs and subsequently internalize. In either case, the data clearly indicate that Nb80-GFP associates with β 2 -ARs after endocytosis, and after uncoating of the endocytic vesicle has occurred (Fig.  3c ). Accordingly, Nb80-GFP recruitment to β 2 -AR-containing endosomes cannot represent an artefact of persistent nanobody binding from the plasma membrane; instead, this observation reveals that β 2 -ARs present in early endosomes are in an activated conformation. Because endosomes contain activated β 2 -ARs, we next asked if receptors engage their cognate G protein from this compartment. Heterotrimeric G proteins and adenylyl cyclase can be observed in endosomes as well as at the plasma membrane, supporting the concept of endosome-based G protein signalling  4, 6, 10, 24  . To directly investigate the subcellular location of G protein activation, we developed a distinct biosensor based on another nanobody, Nb37, which specifically recognizes the guanine-nucleotide-free form of Gα s representing the catalytic intermediate of G protein activation (Fig.  4a )  25  . We hoped that because Nb37 binds a surface of the alpha-helical domain that is accessible only in the nucleotide-free form, we would be able to detect production of this critical but fleeting activation intermediate in living cells. This was indeed the case because Nb37-GFP localized in the cytoplasm of untreated cells and was rapidly recruited from the cytoplasm to the plasma membrane in response to isoprenaline application (Fig.  4b , yellow arrowhead, Pearson coefficient = 0.627). Membrane recruitment of Nb37-GFP was agonist-dependent even in cells overexpressing Gα s and, importantly, the cytoplasmic concentration of Nb37-GFP achieved in our experiments (also approximately 20 nM) was substantially lower than that producing detectable inhibition of G protein activation in vitro (Supplementary Fig.  5 ). Together, these observations suggest that Nb37-GFP indeed functions as a specific biosensor of G s activation under the experimental conditions used. Nb37-GFP was recruited not only to the plasma membrane (Fig.  4b , yellow arrowhead) but also to β 2 -AR-containing endosomes. Notably, endosome recruitment of Nb37-GFP occurred after the appearance of β 2 -ARs in the endosome. Such later recruitment was evident in dual label confocal image series (Fig.  4b  shows a representative example: white arrowhead indicates recently internalized β 2 -AR, white arrow indicates Nb37-GFP recruitment, Pearson coefficient = 0.710; see also Supplementary Video 8). Nb37-GFP recruitment was specifically dependent on receptor activation because a mutant β 2 -AR that is defective in G-protein coupling (β 2 -AR-Cys 341 Gly)  26  did not produce detectable recruitment (Supplementary Fig.  6 ), whereas the distinct G s -coupled DRD1 recruited Nb37-GFP to both the plasma membrane and endosomes (data not shown). Nb37-GFP localized uniformly on β 2 -AR-containing endosomes in cells overexpressing Gα s (Fig.  4b  and Supplementary Video 8) but was recruited non-uniformly in cells expressing endogenous levels (Fig.  4c , arrowhead indicates an example). Moreover, Nb37-GFP recruitment to endosomes had a scintillating appearance, fluctuating rapidly when viewed in live image series (Supplementary Video 9), suggesting that G protein activation detected by Nb37-GFP occurs dynamically from limited regions of the endosome membrane. We then asked if active β 2 -AR G s coupling from endosomes contributes to the cellular response, focusing on cAMP as a classical second messenger carrying the downstream signal, using a previously described real-time assay of cAMP accumulation in living cells and normalizing to the signal produced by receptor-independent activation of adenylyl cyclase with forskolin (5 µM)  27  . Isoprenaline produced a rapid increase in cytoplasmic cAMP accumulation, reaching a maximum within approximately 10 min (Fig.  4d , blue line). Dyngo-4a, a dynamin inhibitor that blocks β 2 -AR endocytosis by inhibiting CCP function  28, 29  , did not detectably affect the earliest portion of the forskolin-normalized cAMP accumulation curve but significantly reduced its later rise (Fig.  4d , green line, grey dots indicate P values), consistent with the two phases of endosome-localized activation detected by the nanobody-derived biosensors. A similar inhibition was observed in cells expressing a mutant β 2 -AR with a C-terminal alanine residue added that prevents efficient recycling (β 2 -AR-Ala)  30  (Supplementary Fig.  7 ), suggesting that the Dyngo-sensitive component of the cAMP response did not represent a secondary consequence of resensitization by receptor recycling  17  . Dyngo-4a did not produce the same effect on cAMP accumulation elicited by the internalization-defective β 2 -AR-3S mutant receptor  21  (Fig.  4e, f ), further supporting the conclusion that the second signalling phase indeed requires receptor localization in endosomes. The present findings revise a long-held tenet of molecular pharmacology, that acute signal transduction mediated by the canonical β 2 -AR G s signal transduction mechanism is plasma membrane delimited. The results provide direct evidence supporting the hypothesis that β 2 -AR endocytosis contributes to a second phase of the acute cellular cAMP response, which represents a significant component of the overall biochemical signal developed within several minutes after the initial agonist application. Thus, while it remains clear that β 2 -ARs can elicit G s -mediated signal transduction from the plasma membrane, the present data reveal a discrete component of the acute signalling response that is initiated from endosomes (Fig.  4g ). It remains unknown if β 2 -ARs are continuously bound by agonist in endosomes, as depicted in the figure for simplicity, but conformational activation of G s in endosomes is both receptor and agonist-dependent. Unambiguous detection of endosome-based activation of acute G-protein-linked signalling is presently limited to the β 2 -AR G s system for which the critical nanobodies are available. However, we believe that endosome-based contribution to the acute signalling response is likely widespread in the GPCR superfamily because the β 2 -AR belongs to the largest group (family A) of GPCR and is often considered a prototype. We also suggest, more generally, that nanobody-based biosensors represent a versatile strategy for probing other types of dynamic conformational change with high spatiotemporal resolution in living cells.

METHODS
Cell Culture, cDNA constructs and transfection HEK293 cells were grown in Dulbecco's minimal essential medium supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS)(UCSF Cell Culture Facility) without antibiotics. Stably transfected HEK293 cell clones expressing Flag-tagged β 2 -AR-3S were created using previously described Flag-tagged β 2 -AR  30  . A plasmid encoding a cyclic permuted luciferase reporter construct, based on a mutated RIIβB cAMP-binding domain from PKA (pGloSensor-20F, Promega). Nb80-eGFP and Nb37-eGFP were created by amplifying Nb80 and Nb37 nanobody complementary DNAs using 5′-CTTGAAAAGCTTGCCGCCACCATGGGACAGGTGCAGCTGCA-3′; 5′-TTCAAGGGATCCATGTGATGGTGATGGTGGTGTGAGGAGACGGT-3′ and 5′-CTTGAAAAGCTTGCCGCCACCATGGGACAGGTGCAGCTGCA-3′; 5′-TTCAAGGGATCCATGTGATGGGCTTCAGGTTCGTGATGGTGATG-3′ primers, respectively, and cloning into the peGFP-N1 vector using HindIII and BamH1. β-arrestin-2-GFP, Clathrin-DsRed, EEA1-DsRed and Gα s -HA were gifts from M. Caron, W. Almers, K. Mostov and P. Wedegaertner, respectively. β-arrestin-2-mCherry was generated by subcloning β-arrestin-2 to pmCherry (Clontech) and β 2 -AR-CFP was generated from the Flag-tagged β 2 -AR construct. Transfections were performed using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Flag tagged human β 2 -AR and β 2 -AR-3S constructs (Ser 355 Gly, Ser 356 Gly, Ser 364 Gly were mutated simultaneously) were labelled with Alexa555 or Alexa488-conjugated M1 anti-FLAG monoclonal antibody (Sigma) as described previously  31  .

Live-cell confocal imaging
Live cell imaging was carried out using Yokagawa CSU22 spinning disk confocal microscope with a 100 ×, 1.4 numerical aperture, oil objective and a CO 2 and 37 °C temperature-controlled incubator. A 488 nm argon laser and a 568 nm argon/krypton laser (Melles Griot) were used as light sources for imaging GFP and Flag signals, respectively. Cells expressing both Flag-tagged receptor and the indicated nanobody-GFP were plated onto glass coverslips. Receptors were surface labelled by addition of M1 anti-Flag antibody (1:1000, Sigma) conjugated to Alexa 555 (A10470, Invitrogen) to the media for 30 min, as described previously  32  . Indicated agonist (isoprenaline, Sigma) or antagonist (CGP-12177, TOCRIS) were added and cells were imaged every 3 s for 20 min in DMEM without phenol red supplemented with 30 mM HEPES, pH 7.4 (UCSF cell culture facility). Time-lapse images were acquired with a Cascade II EM-charge-coupled device (CCD) camera (Photometrics) driven by Micro-Manager 1.4 ( http://www.micro-manager.org ).

Live cell total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy
TIRF imaging was carried out as described previously  33  . Briefly, HEK293 cells coexpressing either Nb80-eGFP and β-arrestin-2-mCherry or Clathrin light chain-DsRed, were imaged in DMEM without phenol red supplemented with 30 mM HEPES, pH 7.4 (UCSF cell culture facility). Imaging was carried out using a Nikon TE-2000E inverted microscope with a 100 ×, 1.49 numerical aperture TIRF objective, equipped for through-theobjective TIRF illumination, a 37 °C temperature-controlled stage (Bioscience Tools) and an objective warmer (Bioptechs). A 488 nm argon laser (Melles Griot) and a 543 nm heliumneon laser (Spectra Physics) were used as light sources. Time-lapse sequences were acquired with a C9100-12 camera (Hamamatsu Photonics) driven by iQ software (Andor). Cells were imaged every 3 s for 20 min.

Image analysis and statistical analysis
Images were saved as 16 bit TIFF files. Quantitative image analysis was carried out on unprocessed images using ImageJ software ( http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij ). Co-localization analysis was estimated by calculating the Pearson's correlation coefficient between the indicated image channels using the co-localization plug-in for ImageJ. Analysis of Nb80-GFP intensity profile along the straight line and Nb80-GFP/β-arrestin or Nb80-GFP/clathrin along the segmented line were carried out using the ImageJ plot profile function. For estimating changes in Nb80-GFP surface fluorescence over time in TIRF images, individual cells were selected manually and fluorescence values measured over the entire stack. A blank area of the image lacking cells was used to estimate background fluorescence. Average fluorescence intensity was measured in each frame, background-subtracted and normalized to the maximum value. P values are from one-tailed unpaired Student's t-tests. For visual presentation (but not quantitative analysis) image series were processed using Kalman stack filter in ImageJ.

Luminescence-based rapid cAMP assay
HEK293 cells were transfected with a plasmid encoding a cyclic-permuted luciferase reporter construct, based on a mutated RIIβB cAMP-binding domain from PKA (pGloSensor-20F, Promega), which produces rapid and reversible cAMP-dependent activation of luciferase activity in intact cells. Cells were plated in 24-well dishes containing approximately 200,000 cells per well in 500 µl DMEM without phenol red and no serum and equilibrated to 37 °C in a light-proof cabinet. An image of the plate was focused on a 512 × 512 pixel electron multiplying CCD sensor (Hamamatsu C9100-13), cells were equilibrated for 1 h in the presence of 250 µg ml -1 luciferin (Biogold), and sequential luminescence images were collected every 10 s to obtain basal luminescence values. The camera shutter was closed, the cabinet opened and the indicated concentration of isoprenaline was bath applied, with gentle manual rocking before replacing in the dark cabinet and resuming luminescence image acquisition. In endocytic manipulation experiments, cells were preincubated with 30 µM Dyngo-4a (abcam Biochemicals) for 15 min. Every 10 s, sequential images were acquired using Micro-Manager ( http://www.micro-manager.org ) and integrated luminescence intensity detected from each well was calculated after background subtraction and correction for vignetting using scripts written in MATLAB (MathWorks). In each multiwell plate, and for each experimental condition, a reference value of luminescence was measured in the presence of 5 µM forskolin, a manipulation that stimulates a moderate amount of receptor-independent activation of adenylyl cyclase. The average luminescence value-measured across duplicate wells-was normalized to the maximum luminescence value measured in the presence of 5 µM forskolin.

FRET imaging
FRET imaging was carried out as described previously  10  . Briefly, HEK293 cells coexpressing β 2 -AR-CFP or DRD1-CFP and Nb80-YFP were imaged in wide field at 37 °C using a shuttered mercury arc lamp and standard CFP excitation (ET430/24 ×) and YFP emission (ET500/20 ×) band pass filters (Chroma). YFP emission was collected using a 535/30 m filter, and CFP emission was collected through a 470/24 m filter. Corrected FRET ratios were obtained using the following equation: NFRET = [(I FRET -BG FRET ) -(I CFP -BG CFP ) X BT DONOR -(I YFP -BG YFP ) X DE ACCEPTOR ]/I CFP . BT DONOR , donor bleed through; DE ACCEPTOR , direct excitation of the acceptor; BG X , background fluorescence; and I X , integrated fluorescence intensity measured in a given channel.

Flow cytometric assay of receptor endocytosis
Surface fluorescence of FLAG-β 2 -AR or FLAG-β 2 -AR-3S expressing HEK293 cells was used to measure receptor endocytosis. Cells were incubated with 10 µM isoprenaline for 20 min at 37 °C to drive receptor internalization to steady state and were subsequently rinsed 3 times with ice-cold PBS, then mechanically lifted and incubated with 1µg ml -1 Alexa647 (Invitrogen)-conjugated M1 anti-FLAG monoclonal antibody (Sigma-Aldrich) at 4 °C for 1 h. Mean fluorescence intensity of 10,000 cells was measured using FACSCalibur instrument (Becton Dickinson). Each condition was performed in triplicate.

Enhanced GFP (eGFP ) calibration
Recombinant eGFP (BioVision) was used for calibrating average fluorescence intensity of the biosensors, imaged in confocal optical sections through the cytoplasm of cells not exposed to agonist (to achieve diffuse cytoplasmic distribution of the biosensors). eGFP was diluted in Hank's balanced salt solution and confocal sections were imaged through droplets of each using the same illumination and acquisition parameters as for imaging the biosensors in cells. For each cell, a background fluorescence value was determined by average fluorescence intensity of a blank region in the same image. The cytoplasmic concentration of biosensors was estimated by interpolation of the background-subtracted value using a linear least-squares fit to the standard plot.

Generation of β 2 -AR-rHDL nanoparticles
Apolipoprotein-AI (Apo-AI) was biotinylated using NHS-PEG4-biotin (Pierce Biotechnology) at a 1:1 molar ratio. Following a 30-min biotinylation reaction at room temperature, the sample was dialysed to remove free biotin. FLAG-tagged β 2 -AR was incorporated into recombinant high density lipoprotein (rHDL) particles as previously described  34, 35  using biotinylated Apo-AI. Receptor-containing particles were then purified by M1 anti-FLAG immunoaffinity chromatography  36  . Particles containing purified monobromobimane-labelled β 2 -AR were generated similarly except not using biotinylated HDL, with receptor labelling and fluorescence analysis carried out as described previously  18  .

Assessing Nb80 binding to immobilized β 2 AR-rHDL
Nb80 binding to unliganded and agonist-occupied β 2 -AR was measured using the OctetRED biolayer interferometry system (Pall FortéBio). In this assay, a target protein is immobilized on the functionalized tip of a fibre optic probe that is dipped into an analyte solution to observe analyte association to the target protein. A dissociation step is then performed by transferring the biosensor into buffer lacking analyte. Analyte association/dissociation is measured by monitoring changes in the interference pattern of a light beam reflected from the biosensor tip as the total mass bound at the tip surface changes  37  . Streptavidin-coated biosensors (Pall FortéBio) were loaded with biotinylated β 2 -AR-rHDL particles for 15 min at room temperature and the biosensors were transferred to the OctetRED instrument. Sensors were placed into assay buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.7, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.02% w/v ascorbic acid, 0.05% w/v BSA) with or without 100 µM isoprenaline for 30 min. To measure Nb80 association, the sensor was transferred to assay buffer with Nb80 (at indicated concentrations) for 5 min, followed by a 30 min dissociation step in assay buffer. Isoprenaline (100 µM) was included in the association and dissociation steps when measuring Nb80 binding to agonist-occupied receptor. All experiments were carried out at 25 °C with the assay plate shaking at 1,000 r.p.m. Buffer-only controls were included in each experiment to monitor for baseline drift, and nonspecific Nb80 binding was measured in a parallel assay using sensors loaded with empty rHDL particles. Raw data were processed to remove baseline and nonspecific binding using Octet Data Analysis 7.0 software (Pall FortéBio) and exported to Prism 5 (GraphPad) for curve fitting. All association and dissociation curves were fit using a single-phase exponential association or decay curves, respectively. Equilibrium binding affinity of Nb80 for β 2 -AR in the presence or absence of the agonist isoprenaline was assessed by monitoring the maximal interference shift generated by Nb80 binding (at varying Nb80 concentrations) to the probe containing β 2 -AR reconstituted in rHDL. The maximal shift was plotted against the Nb80 concentration and fitted by nonlinear regression in Prism 5 (GraphPad) to generate the apparent affinity.

Inhibition of bodipy-GTPγS-FL binding by Nb37
The effect of Nb37 on GTP loading of purified G proteins was measured using 100 nM bodipy-GTPγ s -FL (Invitrogen) essentially as described  25  . In this assay we used the fluorescence emission of bodipy-GTPγ s -FL (λ ex ~470 nm, λ em ~515nm) that accompanies binding of the labelled nucleotide to G protein  38  . Briefly, the fluorescence of 100 nM bodipy-GTPγ s -FL was measured in the presence of 1 mM of the indicated G protein using a 96-well microtitre plate format on a M5 fluorescence plate reader (Molecular Devices). Nb37 was added together with bodipy-GTPγ s -FL and the binding reaction was initiated by the addition of G protein (1 mM) in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 3 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM dithiothreitol in a final volume of 200 ml. Bodipy-GTPγs-FL binding to heterotrimeric G    