Dystrophin, the protein encoded by the Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) gene, exists in a large oligomeric complex. We show here that four glycoproteins are integral components of the dystrophin complex and that the concentration of one of these is greatly reduced in DMD patients. Thus, the absence of dystrophin may lead to the loss of a dystrophin-associated glycoprotein, and the reduction in this glycoprotein may be one of the first stages of the molecular pathogenesis of muscular dystrophy.
DuCHENNE muscular dystrophy is caused by a defective gene located on the X chromosome. Dystrophin, the high-molecular weight protein product of the DMD gene  1  , is localized to the sarcolemmal membrane of normal skeletal muscle  2 -5  but is absent from the skeletal muscle of people with DMD 1 • 2 • 6 , xmd dogs 7 and mdx mice 1 • 5 (the last two being possible animal models for DMD). The amino-acid sequence of dystrophin suggests that it is a membrane cytoskeletal protein  8 • 9  involved in the anchoring of sarcolemmal proteins to the underlying cytoskeleton. But the exact function of dystrophin and its precise role in the resulting necrosis of dystrophic muscle fibres has not been determined. In studies of other genetic diseases involving proteins of the cytoskeleton  10 ' 11  , the absence of one component is sometimes accompanied by the loss of another cytoskeletal protein. Therefore, to understand the molecular pathogenesis of DMD, we sought to identify the proteins associated with or bound to dystrophin and to characterize the status of these proteins in muscle where dystrophin is absent. Recently, we have shown that dystrophin can be isolated from detergent-solubilized skeletal muscle membranes using wheatgerm agglutinin (WGA)-Sepharose, because of its tight association with a WGA-binding glycoprotein  12  • This indicates that the localization of dystrophin to the cytoplasmic face of the sarcolemma  2 -5  results from a tight association of dystrophin with an integral membrane glycoprotein. Here we report the purification of a large oligomeric complex ( ~ 18S) containing *To whom correspondence should be addressed. NATURE • VOL 345 • 24 MAY 1990   dystrophin using sucrose density-gradient centrifugation in the presence of digitonin. We have identified four glycoproteins of apparent relative molecular masses (Mr) 156,000 (156K), SOK, 43K and 35K as integral components of the dystrophin complex. The 156K and SOK glycoproteins are sarcolemmal glycoproteins, as shown by indirect immunofluorescence. Immunoaffinity beads raised against dystrophin and the SOK glycoprotein selectively adsorb the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex. Furthermore, there is a marked reduction of the 156K glycoprotein in muscle from mdx mice and DMD patients. These results imply that in dystrophic muscle, the absence of dystrophin may lead to the loss of a dystrophin-associated glycoprotein. This could be the first step in the molecular pathogenesis of muscular dystrophy.

Dystrophin-glycoprotein complex
This complex was isolated following digitonin-solubilization of rabbit skeletal muscle membranes using WGA-Sepharose and DEAE-cellulose  12  and further purified by sucrose density gradient centrifugation in the presence of 0.1% digitonin. It is evident from the Coomassie blue-stained gel of sequential gradient fractions (Fig.  1 a ) that the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex was separated from the voltage-sensitive sodium channel and the dihydropyridine receptor (Fig.  1 ). The size of the dystrophin complex was ~18S in comparison with {3-galactosidase (15.9S), thyroglobulin (19.2S) and dihydropyridine receptor (20S) standards. Densitometer scanning of the peak dystrophin-containing fractions (10 and 11, Fig.  1 a ) revealed several proteins that co-purified with dystrophin: a broad, diffusely staining component with an apparent Mr of 156K, an 88K protein, a triplet of proteins centred at 59K, a SOK protein, a doublet at 43K and proteins of 35K and 25K. To identify the glycoprotein constituents of the dystrophinglycoprotein complex, sucrose gradient fractions 7-17 were electrophoretically separated, transferred to nitrocellulose and stained with peroxidase-conjugated WGA (Fig.  1 b ). Four WGAbinding proteins with apparent Mr of 156K, SOK, 43K and 35K were found to strictly co-purify with dystrophin. All four proteins were also positively stained with peroxidase-conjugated concanavalin A. In addition, the lower Mr component of the 43K protein doublet (Fig.  1a ) was also positively stained with concanavalin A (not shown). The dystrophin-glycoprotein complex was further characterized with antibodies raised against various components of the (1 1-Lg ml-1 ); c, polyclonal antisera against the C-terminal decapeptide of dystrophin; d, monoclonal antibody (mAb) XIXC2 against dystrophin; e, mAb IVD3 1 against 50K glycoprotein (50 GP); or e, mAb VIA4 1 against the 156K glycoprotein (156 GP). Arrows indicate the positions of dystrophin (DYS), the voltage-sensitive sodium channel (NaCh), and the a 1 anp a 2 subunits of the dihydropyridine (DHP) receptor. Arrowheads denote the positions of the molecular weight standards as indicated. METHODS. Heavy microsomes were prepared from rabbit skeletal muscle  25  and washed twice with 0.6 M KCI in 50 mM Tris-HCI (pH 7.4), 0.165 M sucrose, 0.1 mM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride and 0.75 mM benzamidine to remove contractile proteins. KCI-washed membranes (1 g) were solubilized in 1.0% digitonin, 0.5 M NaCI, and protease inhibitors as previously described  12  . After removal of the ryanodine receptor by immunoaffinity chromatography  26  , the digitonin-solubilized membranes were circulated overnight on a 40 ml WGA-Sepharose column, washed extensively, then eluted with three column volumes of 0.3 M N-acetylglucosamine. Eluted fractions containing dystrophin were applied to a 3-ml DEAE-cellulose column and sequentially eluted with the following NaCI concentrations in buffer A (0.1% digitonin, 50 mM Tris-HCI, pH 7.4, 0.75 mM benzamidine, 0.1 mM PMSF): 0, 25, 50, 75, 100, 110 and 175 mM. Sucrose gradients (12.5 ml linear 5-20% sucrose) containing 0.5 M NaCI and 0.01% NaN 3 in buffer A were prepared using a Beckman density gradient former. Dystrophin complex, which eluted in fraction 2 (3 ml) from the DEAE-column 175 mM NaCI wash, was concentrated to 0.5 ml in a Centricon-100 (Amicon), layered on a sucrose gradient and overlain with 0.5 ml of buffer A containing 175 mM NaCI and 0.01% NaN 3 . Gradients were centrifuged at 4 oc in a Beckman VTi 65.1 vertical rotor for 90 min at 200,000g. Fractions (0.6 ml) were collected from the top of the gradients using an ISCO Model 640 density gradient fractionator. Gradient fractions were separated by SDS-PAGE  27  (3-12% gradient gel) and stained with Coomassie blue (300 fLI concentrated with a Centricon-100) or transferred to nitocellulose (75 fLI of fractions in b, 25 fLI in c and d, and 50 fLI in e and f) and stained with various antibodies. The blot shown in e was prepared from a gel run in the absence of reducing agent plus 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide. Gel lanes were scanned with a Hoefer GS 300 scanning densitometer and analysed using GS-360 data analysis software. Polyclonal antisera against a chemically synthesized decapeptide representing the C-terminal of dystrophin was raised in New Zealand white rabbits as described  28  . Hybridomas were obtained from female BALB/c mice which had been immunized with rabbit skeletal muscle membranes and boosted with WGA eluate  29 .  complex. Antisera from a rabbit immunized with a chemically synthesized decapeptide representing the predicted C-terminal amino-acid sequence of human dystrophin, stained a single high-M, protein (Fig.  lc ). This protein co-migrated with the predominant isoform of dystrophin stained by sheep polyclonal anti-dystrophin antibodies  13  (not shown). The antisera showed immunofluorescence staining only on the cell periphery (Fig.  2a  ), which indicates a restricted localization of dystrophin to the sarcolemma of rabbit skeletal muscle. A library of monoclonal antibodies against muscle proteins eluted from WGA-Sepharose was also screened for reactivity against components of the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex and by indirect immunofluorescence staining of rabbit skeletal muscle. Of six hybridomas which showed immunofluorescence staining only on the sarcolemma, monoclonal antibodies XIXC2 (Fig.  1 d ) and VIA4 2 (not shown) were found to stain dystrophin on immunoblots. Both dystrophin monoclonal antibodies are IgM subtypes, and recognized both native and denatured dystrophin. Monoclonal antibody XIXC2 also recognizes the minor lower-M, isoform of dystrophin which co-purifies with the more abundant isoform (Fig.  ld ). Two of the other sarcolemma-specific monoclonal antibodies were specific for components of the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex (Fig.  le  and lf ). The SOK glycoprotein stained with monoclonal antibody IVD3 1 (Fig.  le ), and has been localized exclusively to the sarcolemmal membrane of rabbit skeletal muscle (Fig.  2c ). Monoclonal antibody IVD3 1 recognized only the non-reduced form of the SOK glycoprotein and is not highly cross-reactive. Monoclonal antibody VIA4 1 stained the 156K glycoprotein (Fig.  lf ) which co-purified with dystrophin. VIA4 1 recognized the denatured form of the 156K glycoprotein and is highly cross-reactive. It also exhibited weak, but specific immunofluorescent staining of the sarcolemmal membrane (Fig.  2d ), consistent with its low affinity for the native 156K glycoprotein. In agreement with the immunofluorescence results, a rabbit membrane preparation greatly enriched in sarcolemmal proteins also showed a substantial enrichment in dystrophin, the 156K and SOK glycoproteins (not shown). Immunofluorescence staining for dystrophin, SOK glycoprotein or the 156K 

ARTICLES
glycoprotein was equally distributed in fast and slow muscle fibres (not shown). The association of the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex was also assessed by immunoaffinity adsorption. Immunoaffinity beads were prepared with the monoclonal antibodies XIXC2 (anti-dystrophin) and IVD3 1 (anti-SOK glycoprotein) and incubated with the partially purified dystrophin-glycoprotein complex. After pelleting the immunoaffinity beads, the supernatants were removed and the beads were washed extensively. The supernatants and washes were pooled (voids), concentrated, and analysed by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting. The voids from the XIXC2 (anti-dystrophin) and the IVD3 1 (anti-SOK glycoprotein) immunoaffinity beads contained no dystrophin, 59K triplet, SOK, 43K doublet or 35K proteins as detected by Coomassie blue staining (Fig.  3a  ). Both the XIXC2 (anti-dystrophin) and IVD3 1 (anti-SOK glycoprotein) immunoaffinity beads quantitatively removed dystrophin from the starting material (Fig.  3c  ). Analysis of the voids for the 156K (Fig.  3d ) and SOK (Fig.  3e ) glycoproteins revealed that both the XIXC2 and IVD3 1 immunoaffinity beads selectively adsorbed virtually all of each of these glycoproteins from the voids, whereas the voltage-sensitive sodium channel (Fig.  3b ) and the a 1 and a 2 subunits of the dihydropyridine receptor (not shown) remained in the voids. As detected by peroxidase-conjugated WGA (not shown), the 43K and 35K glycoproteins were also adsorbed from the voids. Immunoblots of immunoaffinity beads separated on gels indicated that dystrophin, the 156K and SOK glycoproteins were retained by the beads and not selectively proteolysed (not shown). Initial experiments with monoclonal antibody VIA4 1 (anti-156K glycoprotein) have indicated that it has too low an affinity for the native 156K glycoprotein to be successful in this type of experiment.

Analysis of dystrophic muscle
To investigate whether either of the dystrophin-linked 156K or SOK glycoproteins is affected by the absence of dystrophin, immunoblots of skeletal muscle membranes were prepared from control and mdx mice and stained with the various antibodies METHODS. The indirect immunofluorescence labelling of fixed 8-I'-m transverse cryostat sections from rabbit gastrocnemius was carried out as described  29  . Sections were preincubated for 20 min with 5% normal goat antiserum in PBS buffer, followed by a 2 h incubation at 37 oc with the primary antibody (hybridoma supernatants or 1:1,000 diluted antiserum). After washing in PBS, the sections were further incubated for 30 min at 37 oc in PBS with a 1:50 dilution of FITC-Iabelled goat F(ab') 2 anti-mouse lgG or anti-rabbit lgG and subsequently examined in a Leitz fluorescence microscope. FIG.  3  lmmunoadsorption of the dystrophinglycoprotein complex. Fraction 2 (125 f.LI in a, 25 f.LI in b-e) eluted from the 175 mM NaCI wash of the DEAE-cellulose column described in Fig.  1   from the 175 mM NaCI wash of the DEAE-cellulose column (Fig.  1 ). After pelleting, the supernatants were decanted (voids) and the affinity beads were washed with 5 aliquots (0.7 ml) of buffer A containing 0.5 M NaCI. The void from each affinity column and the five washes were pooled and concentrated to 375 f.LI in a Centricon-100. In addition, 0.75 ml of fraction (Fig.  4 ). Staining with polyclonal antisera against the C-terminal decapeptide of dystrophin revealed that dystrophin was completely absent from mdx mouse membranes (Fig.  4a ). In addition, comparison of normal and mdx mouse with immunostaining by monoclonal antibody VIA4 1 against the 156K glycoprotein revealed that the 156K glycoprotein was absent or greatly reduced in mdx mouse membranes (Fig.  4b ). Staining of identical transfers with sheep polyclonal antisera against either the ryanodine receptor (Fig.  4c ) or the dihydropyridine receptor (Fig.  4d ) did not differ between control and mdx mouse muscle membranes. Monoclonal antibody IVD3 1 against the 50K glycoprotein did not cross-react with normal mouse membranes and thus could not be evaluated. The absence of the 156K glycoprotein was also confirmed using SDS muscle extracts (not shown) instead of isolated membranes from control and mdx 

METHODS. Membranes from control and mdx mice (gifts of Dr Richard
Strohmen and Dr Richard Entrikin of University of California, Berkeley and Davis, respectively) were prepared in 10% sucrose, 76.8 nM aprotinin, 0.83 mM benzamidine, 1 mM iodoacetamide, 1.1 iJ.M leupeptin, 0.7 f.LM pepstatin A, 0.23 mM PMSF, 20 mM Tris-maleate, pH 7.0, by centrifuging muscle homogenates for 15 min at 14,000g and subsequently pelleting the supernatant for 30 min at 125,000g, followed by KCI washing as described in Fig.  1 . Control and mdx mouse muscle membranes were analysed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting as described in Fig.  1 . The amount of 156K glycoprotein in each preparation was estimated densitometrically from autoradiographs of identical blots incubated with 125 1-labelled sheep anti-mouse secondary antibody  3 2 .  318 SOOP-- 1 2 .3 1 2 3 2 3 1 2 3 2 was diluted to 4.2 ml, concentrated to 375 iJ.I and used as control. Column voids were analysed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting as described in Fig.  1 . Monoclonal antibody G/C6 against the skeletal muscle sodium channel  31  was the gift of Dr Robert Barchi (University of Pennsylvania). mice. Estimation of the amount of 156K glycoprotein remaining in the mdx muscle membranes using 125 1-labelled secondary antibodies and total membrane preparations from four control and four mdx mice revealed an average reduction of 85% in mdx muscle. Total muscle extracts were also prepared from biopsy samples of normal controls and DMD patients (obtained from the Department of Neuropathology, University of Iowa) . The dystrophic samples showed no staining with antibodies against dystrophin by indirect immunofluorescence microscopy (not shown) and immunoblotting (Fig.  Sa ). In contrast to the normal muscle extract, the three DMD samples showed greatly reduced staining for the 156K glycoprotein (Fig.  5b  ). In contrast, identical immunoblots stained with monoclonal antibodies against the Ca2+-dependent ATPase (Fig.  5c ) revealed no difference in the staining intensity between normal and dystrophic muscle samples. Again, the amount of 156K glycoprotein was reduced by about 90% in DMD samples.

Discussion
We have presented evidence for the existence of a large oligomeric complex (-ISS) containing dystrophin, a 59K triplet METHODS. Frozen muscle biopsy samples (50 mg) were crushed in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle and then prepared for electrophoresis as described  6  The pulverized muscle samples were transferred to 10 volumes of SDS-PAGE sample buffer (10% SDS, 2M sucrose, 4% 2-mercaptoethanol, 0.002% bromophenol blue. 260 mM Tris-HCI, pH 6.8), vortexed. and precipitated material allowed to settle. Aliquots (50 iJ.I) of the 50Sextracted muscle samples were analysed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting as described in Fig.  1  and the amount of 156K glycoprotein was estimated as described in Fig.  4 . and four sarcolemmal glycoproteins (156K, 50K, 43K and 36K). At least one of the proteins in the complex is an integral membrane protein, as 1.0% digitonin was necessary to solubilize the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex. The immunoaffinity experiments demonstrate that the complex is tightly associated. To date, a large number of antibodies specific for extracellular matrix proteins, cytoskeletal proteins, plasma membrane pump, channel and receptor proteins have been screened for reactivity against the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex. None of these antibodies to known proteins has demonstrated cross-reactivity to any component of the complex. The elucidation of primary sequences by recombinant DNA techniques should provide clues to the function of the dystrophin-associated glycoproteins. The surface of DMD myofibres have been reported to show altered  14  or decreased  15  lectin binding, and a 370K glycoprotein is apparently missing from DMD muscle  16  . However, to our knowledge this is the first demonstration of the marked deficiency of a glycoprotein that is closely linked to dystrophin. The substantial reduction of the 156K glycoprotein from muscles of mdx mice and DMD patients is analogous to findings in erythrocytes of individuals afflicted with hereditary elliptocytosis  17 ,  in which the absence of the cytoskeletal protein band 4.1 

Flat-spectrum radio sources: cosmic conspiracy or relativistic neutrons?
Peter M. Giovanoni & Demosthenes Kazanas Laboratory for High Energy Astrophysics, NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland 20771. USA RADIO-LOUD active galactic nuclei (AGNs) tend to show extended emission in the form of jets and an unresolved central core, from which the jets presumably originate. The intensity spectrum of the core varies smoothly from 10s.s to 10 16 Hz in frequency\ and is flat (constant with frequency) between 10 9 and 10 12 Hz, implying that a single emission mechanism, probably synchrotron radiation, is responsible. Because synchrotron emission below -10  13  Hz would be self-absorbed for a uniform source under conditions typical of AGNs, inhomogeneous models have been used to account for these spectra. These models, which require the magnetic field NATURE • VOL 345 • 24 MAY 1990   LETTERS TO NATURE associated proteins. As antibody probes to other components of the dystrophin complex become available, it will be interesting to determine if any other proteins are also affected in mdx and DMD muscle. How the absence of dystrophin leads to the clinical manifestation of DMD is an unanswered question. Clearly there could be many steps in the disease process, yet we may have identified the first, which is the loss of a dystrophin-associated glycoprotein due to the absence of dystrophin. For example, muscle from mdx mice shows elevated intracellular ionized Ca 2 + levels and corresponding higher net degradation of muscle proteins  20  • Loss of a dystrophin-anchored protein with a role in the regulation of intracellular calcium could result in elevated intracellular calcium levels and lead to the reported activation of calciumdependent protease activities  21  • Such a mechanism could explain the abnormal muscle protein degradation and fibre necrosis of dystrophic muscle. The absence of dystrophin-associated proteins in dystrophic muscle may complicate the therapeutic efficacy of myoblast transfer  22  , as the reintroduction of dystrophin synthesis might not lead to recovery of associated protein levels and thus could necessitate treatment at only one particular developmental stage. Finally, a deficiency or defect in a dystrophin-associated glycoprotein could perhaps explain the DMD-like symptoms observed in suspected autosomal-recessive patients  23  • 24 that express apparently normal dystrophin. 0

LETTERS TO NATURE
strength and the electron density and energy to vary according to strict power laws, reproduce the flat spectra by a number of self-absorbed components2-4, but they do not explain the origin of radiating electrons at -10 18 em from the AGN core, in view of the very short lifetime of the electrons in an AGN environment. Here we propose that energy is transported from the central source by relativistic neutrons, which travel freely over a large volume and decay into relativistic protons. The protons produce secondary electrons which generate the observed radiation. The photon spectra thus produced are largely model independent and flat. Relativistic neutrons can result from the collisions of highenergy protons with the ambient gas  5  , or high-energy protons with the ambient photon field if their energies are sufficiently large  6  • Actually, in high-energy pp collisions the leading particle carries most of the energi. In about half of these interactions the leading proton is converted into a neutron, so the neutrons can carry away -25-50% of the total luminosity available (here we assume that this fraction is 25%). But unlike protons, the relativistic neutrons are not tied to the ambient magnetic field; they readily escape from the system and traverse on the average a distance r = 3 x 10 13 'Yn em before they decay, 'Yn being the neutron Lorentz factor. Therefore, if the neutron distribution