INTRODUCTION
According to the previous studies, water shortage is a reason to implement the environment landscape system (ELS) in urban management framework to achieve the sustainability of water resources. Developing a combination system for landscape restoration and storm water management model (SWMM) could be a new urban rainwater management concept. For this object, it is necessary to determine the hydrologic characteristics to establish a sustainable system using the urban landscape and the storm management model. The development of a restoration system that can integrate stormwater management functions is a necessary step to truly realize the sustainable development of green cities. The Chinese government has begun implementing the ELS plan to resolve the drought in urban water supplement. The construction of the proposed plan is a complex systematic project that requires a large amount of data to support the city's physical geography, socioeconomics, water resources, and ecological environment. Moreover, EPA's Storm Water Management Model (SWMM) has been incorporated to the decision system which was used in the previous studies for planning, analysis, and design related to stormwater runoff, and drainage systems in urban areas. However, the implementation of the landscape plan based on the SWMM encountered some obstacles and challenges. The meteorological situation of a city with water shortage was incorporated to establish the surface water hydrological model of Teaneck Creek in central China.

MATERIAL AND METHODS


Urban landscape system
To create a stable structure in urban water consumption, it is necessary to pay attention to the flow circulation mechanism, the use of unconventional water sources with acceptable quality such as rain and floods. Investigations showed that currently the development and use of unplanned water resources to solve the problem of water scarcity is a strategic policy. Desalination, groundwater balancing and the effective use of rainfall are examples of these policies. In addition, reuse of water such as rainwater and flood control and its application for urban use after treatment is essential based on regional conditions. The schematic of the considered structure to combine the water environment restoration system and storm water management model (SWMM) was shown in Figure  1 .

Storm-water management model (SWMM)
SWMM is a dynamic hydraulic-hydrologic simulation model that is used for single event or long-term data set of runoff quantity and quality from primarily urban areas. The runoff component operates on a collection of sub-catchment areas that receive precipitation and generate runoff and pollutant loads. The routing portion transports this runoff The basic equations used in SWMM have been updated in several stages. These changes have occurred due to modules that must be changed for different conditions. However, the main process of the model and its assumptions are based on basic principles. The environmental components required to simulate a project are hydrological information, In the main framework of the landscape plan, a block paver system could be applied with impervious paver blocks laid on the sand or pea gravel layer supported with a gravel storage layer below. Rainwater is collected in the open space between the blocks and transported to the storage area and native soil below. One of the other equipment is a rainwater reservoir (bucket) for collecting the rainwater, which will be released or reused during a drought period. The reservoir can be located on the surface or subsurface with the storage capacity larger than the common bucket. Rain garden is a hydraulic structure that could be constructed in a landscape to collect the rain water from a roof, road or street and helps it to penetrate into the ground. Grass and flower plantation can be a cost effective and beautiful way to reduce runoff from the proposed landscape. Moreover, rain gardens provide shelter and food for song birds, butterflies, and other wildlife and helps to filter out pollutants in runoff. More advanced rain gardens with drainage systems are often applied to as bioretention to amend soils. Vegetative depressions includes depressions, ditches or slopes covered with grass and other vegetation. Vegetative depressions slow down the speed of collected runoff and give it more time to penetrate the underlying native soil. Infiltration ditches are shallow trenches with stone or rubble that construct temporary subsurface storage of stormwater runoff, thereby enhancing the natural capacity of the ground to store and drain water. They allow water to infiltrate into the surrounding soils from the bottom and sides of the trench. Usually, Infiltration ditches should receive inflow from an adjacent impermeable surface, but point source inflows may be acceptable. Additionally, a continuous permeable pavement system should be designed to achieve the artificial porous media through the road immediately, where the rainwater will penetrate into the site at a natural speed. Green roof system is an extension for the common roof which involves a root repellent system, water-proofing, drainage system, filter, and vegetation cover. They contain vegetation that allows rainfall to penetrate and store water for evapotranspiration. Green roofs are particularly cost effective in dense urban areas with high land values and in large industrial or office buildings where stormwater management costs may be high. Downpipe treatment is a beneficial system for cities with combined sewerage structures to cut off down pipes which is used to store rainfall or help for seepage into the soil. Moreover, this system allows the rainwater to drain into permeable landscape areas and lawns instead of direct flow in gutters.

Model calibration
Calibration and verification of hydrodynamic models is a topic that has been considered by many researchers and users of these models. Point of view research papers confirmed the need for a calibration process but the calibration methods were different  (Kleidorfer et    ΔV ¼ P þ S i þ G i À ETa À I À S 0 À G 0 ± T (1) where ΔV ¼ storage capacity variation; P ¼ precipitation; S i ¼ surface water infiltration; G i ¼ surface water infiltration; ETa ¼ actual evapotranspiration; I ¼ infiltration; S 0 ¼ surface water seepage; G 0 ¼ surface water seepage; T ¼ tidal current. The surface flow rate will be obtained using the Manning equation. Q ¼ 1 n AR 2=3 S 1=3 (2) where Infiltration rate (I r ) is one of the main component of the decision system that is formulated as follow: Q ¼ discharge, n ¼ Manning roughness coefficient A ¼ cross- I r ¼ I s (1 þ C p (SM m À SM)=SM m ) (3) where I s ¼ infiltration rate under the saturated condition; C p ¼ the permeability coefficient; SM m ¼ soil water capacity; SM ¼ soil water content. The actual transplantation (ETa) value is obtained by applying a correction factor to the potential evapotranspiration which is calculated by the following equations: ETp i ¼ 1:6 10τ i θ a (4) θ ¼ X τ i 5 1:514 (5) E ¼ 0:675θ 3 À 77:1θ 2 þ 17920θ þ 0:49 (6) where ETp ¼ the monthly potential evapotranspiration (ETp); τ i ¼ the average monthly temperature, θ ¼ the local thermal index, E ¼ is the actual evaporation. In the developed simulation, it is assumed that the groundwater inflow (G i ) is negligible and not included in the water budget calculation (Tan et al. 2017). Although there is some evidence of groundwater movement in some places, there is a highly impermeable clay layer under most parts of the system, minimizing the impact of groundwater. In this study, 10 measured precipitation events were used to calibrate the model and three events were considered for model validation (Table  1 ). Infiltration coefficients, the amount of permeable and impermeable lands were the components that need to uncer-   2 . The calibration of the model continues until it is determined by statistical indicators that the results of the calibrated model are in good agreement with the measured data. To evaluate the models from the statistical indicators of EFF model efficiency, the mean of the second root of the error is RMSE, the normalized RMSE (NRMSE), the residual mass coefficient of CRM. EFF ¼ 1 À P n i¼1 (O m À O c ) 2 P n i¼1 (O m À O m ) 2 0 B B B @ 1 C C C A × 100 (7) RMSE ¼ 1 À P n i¼1 (O m À O c ) 2 n 0 B B @ 1 C C A 1 2 (8) CRM ¼ 1 À P n i¼1 O m À P n i¼1 O c P n i¼1 O m 0 B B B @ 1 C C C A × 100 (9) where O m is the measured value, O c is the calibrated value, n is the number of samples used and O is the average value of the observed parameter.  The percentage of permeability PPer À 30%-þ 30% percentage of water received is transferred to the transport module. In the next step, transport module that is composed of a set of units with transfer and processing features including pipes, channels, etc., which is embodied in the combination of nodes and connections. The user-defined hydrological process can also be set to receive input from the surface module and groundwater module. Runoff flow rate in urban environments due to the impermeability of land cover increases the speed and volume of outflow. Hydrological planning in urban conditions is complex with more design and evaluation components and is significantly affected by the urbanization process. In these regions, slope, surface coverage, permeability and social and economic constraints have a greater and more multifaceted impact than the natural environment. Therefore, simulating and monitoring the flow path from rainfall to storage or consumption is a complex process with different sources of uncertainty  (Muleta et al. ) . In this study, SWMM was simulated using the meteorological data recorded in central China. There are some equipment including 1. Catchment sub basin, 2. Node, 3. Connecting passage and 4. Rain gauge which have been implemented in different modules to generate the simulation system. Catchment sub basin can be divided into water area and water free area, while water area can be divided into flow area and water storage area. Sub-watershed is the smallest hydrological unit, only the only outlet is set, and the setting parameters include rain gauge, outlet, impervious rate, etc. Node is the confluence or inflection point of the water passage path. There are many types of visualization objects of nodes, including intersections, outfalls, diverters and reservoirs. The intersection is the connection point of the drainage system pipeline, and the main input parameters include the elevation of the inner bottom, the height from the surface, and the external inflow data. The outfall is the final node of the drainage system, and the main input parameters include invert elevation, boundary condition type, etc. Connecting passage is usually composed of transportation conduit in the drainage system. The connected visualization equipment mainly includes a conduit, water pump, flow regulator, etc. Rain gauge provides rainfall data for sub-basins. The rainfall data can be the precipitation data measured in a user-defined time period or imported from outside. The main input parameters include data type, time step, precipitation data source, etc.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


Model evaluation
The results of evaluation criteria for model calibration and validation processes are summarized in Table  3 . According to the table, the accuracy of the model is acceptable for pre- Comparing the different outflow ratios shows the relationship between the outflow and rainfall in estimated methods. As shown in Figure  4 , as the rainfall time increases, the total outflow of the three roads is increasing. Among them, the proportion of river outflow increases with rainfall time, while the proportion of total outflow of bricks and subsurface drainage system decreases, which indicates that the impact of water flow capacity on roads is greater. After rainfall intensity increases, more water flows out through the river channel. Therefore, it can be seen that the faster the runoff, the more important the river outflow becomes.

Runoff capture rate and storage capacity
The criterion for selecting an appropriate solution is considering the environmental, economic, social and technical conditions of the project. According to the mentioned criteria, it is necessary to consider appropriate instructions in the design in different regions that have different climatic conditions. Therefore, according to the geographical coordinates and climate of the study area, the relationship between runoff production and required water storage volume is obtained as Figure 5.

Runoff hydrograph
The traditional development model will cause problems such as the change of land cover type, the advance of peak runoff time, the increase of peak flow and total   runoff. As shown in Figure 6, after the comprehensive development of urban water environment landscape stormwater management system proposed in this paper, the peak flow and total runoff will return to the level before the development, or even more slow down the peak rainfall. The predicted runoff hydrograph is close to zero due to the effect of storage sources and outlet reservoir at the beginning of rainfall. In general, various aspects of the evaluation and application of landscape rainwater system to create a natural hydrological background are: optimizing the combination of permeable surfaces (vegetation and porous) and impermeable (road, roof and street) to increase the volume of infiltrated water. Rain infiltration conditions to permeable areas should be provided in terms of slope, porosity and surface cover in such a way that the permeable surfaces are located in the flow path and have a high ability to maintain and percolation. Water storage and release systems reduce the rate and temporary storage of runoff and reduce the peak flow of the hydrograph. This structure, which is a common example of a pool, is an effective measure to control and direct water. Runoff storage is based on the comprehensive use of rainwater resources and runoff reduction, whose tasks are to reduce peak flow and control runoff pollution. Through proper design, many landscape rainwater facilities can store, adjust and purify hydrological functions such as rainwater garden, low potential green space, landscape water body, rainwater pond, multi-purpose adjustment and storage, etc. CONCLUSION In this paper, the SWMM technology was established based on the correlation between the data of the central waterscarce city, ground elevation data and community drainage official website data. Through the experiment and on-site experimental verification, it was proved that the model could be applied to the central water shortage. The improvement of water resources in a water city was conducive to improve the city's water storage capacity and urban anti-pollution ability. Through the established model, it can be found that the application of this model can analyze the water storage capacity and water accumulation status of the community under different rainfall conditions and the velocity of rivers in cities. These can serve the purpose of forecasting the urban rain period and regulating the urban water storage. The established framework in this study is used for monitoring the speed of the runoff flow and the volume of the flow after the rainfall. In simulation and empirical studies, it was found that the number of urban waterlogging in the reconstructed place was significantly reduced during the rainy period, and the water accumulation status in some places has been improved. Furthermore, the simulation found that the regulation, energy storage capacity of regulation, and energy storage facilities should be dynamic under rainfall conditions because the runoff generation and confluence processes were dynamic. The current source control measures are less rain that may have a negative impact on river ecology. The effect of reducing flood peaks under heavy rainfall conditions is not enough. For the source section, control measures that consider process control were proposed, and new and old measures were adjusted through model simulations. The comparison results show that the new source control measures not only eliminate the negative impact on the river ecology, but also improve the river ecological environment flood peak reduction capacity.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
All relevant data are available from an online repository or repositories. 