the authors 
[5]  and the structures determined by Poglitsch et al.  [3]  are summarized in Table  1 . The bromide has two tetragonal phases. One of them corresponds to the tetragonal phase of the chloride and the other to that of the iodide. In a recent paper  [5] , we reported calorimetric and spectroscopic studies of the phase transitions of MAPbX, (X = Cl, Br, I), where MA represents the methylammonium ion, CH,NH: . All the phase transitions were of the first order. The large transition entropies indicated that the phase transitions are of the order-disorder type. The entropy values were interpreted with structural models in which each MA ion is disordered with respect to the orientations of the C-N axis itself and around the C-N axis. In the present paper, we investigate the pressure dependence of the phase transitions of MAPbX, (X = Cl, Br, I) by using a high pressure DTA. Our purpose is to determine the p-T phase diagrams of the three halides and thereby to obtain 

EXPERIMENTAL
The sample preparation of MAPbX, is the same as described in the previous paper  [5] . The DTA experiments were performed with a home-made apparatus described elsewhere  [8] . It was essentially a metal block made of copper-beryllium alloy. Two wells were drilled symmetrically in the block, one being for the sample and the other for the reference material. The temperature difference between the two wells was measured by a copper<onstantan thermocouple encapsulated in a stainless-steel sheath and was recorded on a strip chart as a function of temperature. The apparatus was designed for the temperature range between 90 and 400 K. Hydrostatic pressure was applied to the sample crystals using helium gas as the pressure-transmitting medium. The pressure range of the measurement was between 0. 1 MPa (atmospheric pressure) and 200 MPa. The applied 278 CH,NH,PbC& CH, NH, PbBr, CH,NH,PbI, N. ONODA-YAMAMLJRO et al. Table 1. Structures and transition temperatures of CH,NH,PbX, (X = Cl, Br, I) orthorhombic tetragonal cubic P222, 171.5 K P4/mmm 177.2 K Pm3m orthorhombic tetragonal tetragonal cubic Pna2, 148.8 K P4lmmm 154.0 K I4/mcm 236.3 K Pm3m orthorhombic tetragonal cubic Pna2, 161.4 K I4/mcm 330.4 K

Pm3m
Structures are determined by Poglitsch et al.  [3]  and transition temperatures are determined by the authors  [5] . pressure was not regulated but the pressure change experienced during the traverse of any phase transition was within 0.1 MPa. The effect of hydrostatic pressure on the calibration of the thermocouple is _ small (-0.3 mK MPa-' at 50°C). Therefore, the ambient pressure calibration was used without correction. The mass of the DTA sample was 0.4-0.7 g. To determine the pressures and temperatures of the phase transitions precisely, the DTA measurements were carried out with rather slow heating rate (0.3-l .O K mini) and the rate was kept as nearly constant as possible for the measurement of the same phase transition at different pressures. All the phase transitions observed in the present study were of the first order, and so the transition temperatures were determined as the intersections of the extrapolation of the rising part of the peaks and the base lines. In all cases, the transition temperatures determined at 0.1 MPa agreed within 0.1 K with those determined by the previous heat capacity measurement  [5] . 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Figure 1 shows the experimental DTA curves of MAPbCl, at several pressures up to 75.0 MPa. The heating rate was 0.3-0.4 Kmin-'. At atmospheric pressure (0.1 MPa), two endothermic peaks corresponding to the P222, -P4/mmm and P4/mmm-Pm3m transitions were observed at 171.4 K and 177.2 K, respectively. With increasing pressure, the peak at 171.4 K shifted to higher temperatures and the one at 177.2 K to lower temperatures. The two peaks merged into one at 75.0 MPa, above which only a single peak was observed. This indicates the existence of a triple point at around 75 MPa in MAPbCl, . I I I I I I I 150 200 210 T/K Fig. 3. DTA curves of CH,NH,Pb19 under various pressures in the low temperature range. low temperature region. The heating rate was 0.6-0.9 K min-I. The Pna2, -I4/mcm transition of the crystal occurred at higher temperatures with increasing pressure. On further pressurization, the peak split into two at around 85 MPa. The two peaks separated further at higher pressures. This indicates that the triple point exists at about 85 MPa, above which a new phase appears. Thus, the triple points were found in all of the three MAPbX, (X = Cl, Br, I) crystals below 100 MPa. The experimental DTA curves of MAPbBr, and MAPbI, in the high temperature region are shown in Figs  4  and  5 , respectively. The heating rates were 0.7-1.0 and 0.7-0.8 K min-' for MAPbBr, and MAPbI,, respectively. An endothermic peak due to the I4/mcm -Pm3m transition was observed in both samples. As indicated by the scales (and by the increased noise level in the base line of the curves) in Figs  4  and  5 , the peak heights of these transitions are much smaller than those of the other transitions shown before. This is because the I4/mcm -Pm3m transitions of both crystals are of a gradual type and the first-order component of the transition entropy is only 46% of the total  [5] . The peak temperature decreased monotonically and the peak shape became broader with increasing pressure for MAPbBr,. For MAPbI,, however, the transition line had a maximum around 110 MPa, below which the slope dT,,/dp was positive and above which negative. The peak shape and area did not change significantly in the whole pressure range. Table  2  summarizes the transition temperature T,, its pressure dependence dT,/dp, the transition entropy AuaS, and the transition volume AtR V. Here, AtnS is the value determined from calorimetry at atmospheric pressure  [5]  Table 2. Thermal quantities related to the phase transitions of CH,NH,PbX, (X = Cl, Br, I) Compound Transition dT,,ldP lO-2 K MPa-' T,, K At,, S J K-' mol-' t Am V ----_I cm3 mol-' CH, NH, PbCl, tet II -cubic ortho I -cubic ortho I -tet II CH, NH, PbBr, tet I -cubic tet II -tet I ortho II -tet II ortho II -tet I CH,NH,PbI, tet I -cubic ortho II -tet I ? -tet I ortho II -? -0.61* 177.2(177.2) 14.6 -0.09 3.2 5.7 171.4(171.5) 10.0 0.57 -0.57' 236.2(236.3) 8.2 -0.05 -3.2 154.4(154.0) 4.1 -0.13 9.6 148.8(148.8) 11.2 1.08 7.1 3.5* 330.5(330.4) 9.7 0.34 17.5 161.4(161.4) 19.0 3.3 58.1 -3.6 -Cubic: Pm3m; tet I: tetragonal I4/mcm; tet II: tetragonal P4/mmm; ortho I: orthorhombic P222,; ortho II: orthorhombic Pna2,. All the values of the transition volume are quite small; less than 2% of the molar volume of MAPbX, (Cl: 110cm3 mol-I, Br: 124cm3 mol-', I: 153 cm3 mol-I). This indicates that the structural disorder discussed previously in relation to the transition entropies  [5]  is such that the methylammonium ions are packed as efficiently in the disordered phases as in the ordered phases. phase may have the same structure as the tetragonal P4/mmm phase of MAPbBr, and MAPbCl,. Structural study of this new phase under pressure is highly desirable. All the boundaries between the cubic and tetragonal phases are upward convex while the other phase boundaries are essentially straight lines in the pressure and temperature ranges studied here. It is noteworthy that the transition line from the tetragonal to cubic phase in the iodide has a maximum around 120 MPa. This means that the transition volume At,, V changes its sign from positive to negative according to the Clausius-Clapeyron equation. The transition entropy AtrsS should be positive for the thermodynamic stability condition. In fact, this quantity (or its isothermal part) is practically constant in the whole pressure region studied as revealed by the shape and area of the DTA peaks (Fig.  5 ). An elegant systematic relation between the pressure and the ionic size of the halogen ion is known to hold in ammonium halides  [7] : Ammonium chloride under atmospheric pressure corresponds to ammonium iodide under a high pressure while ammonium bromide corresponds to a situation in between with respect to the relative stability of the three crystalline phases differing from each other in the relative orientations of the ammonium ions. No such simple relation has been found so far for the present substances. This is probably due to the complexity of the interionic interaction and the manner in which the orientational disorder takes place in the present compounds in comparison with ammonium halides. However, we can make a general statement from the phase diagram given in Fig.  6 : the stability domain of the tetragonal phase narrows at higher pressure both from below and above. Thus the molar volume of the tetragonal phase is larger than those of the cubic and orthorhombic phases (in the iodide, for p > 120 MPa). It is unexpected that the molar volume decreases as the crystal undergoes the phase transition from the partially ordered tetragonal phase to the fully disordered cubic phase, even though the change in the molar volume is rather small as noted above. It is more common to find an increase of the molar volume accompanying a phase transition from an ordered to a disordered phase. However, molar volume reduction has also been found in methylammonium iodide as it undergoes a phase transition from a partially ordered tetragonal phase to the fully disordered cubic phase  [9] . Significance at the molecular level of these uncommon properties, shared by the crystals containing methylammonium ions, is still to be investigated. In particular, numerical calculation of the interionic interactions among three ions (MA+, Pb*+, X-) taking various types of orientational disorder into account is a subject for a future study.