Introduction
Over the past decade, a variety of immuno therapeutic approaches have been tested to stimulate the cell ular and humoral arms of the immune system and to induce regression of malignant disease. Several investi gational strategies are under consideration, including the applica tion of cytokines and of adjuvant agents that modulate the cytokine response; therapeutic cancer vaccines designed to elicit cellular immune responses against tumorassociated antigens (TAAs); and mono clonal antibody drugs.  1  At present, only a few immuno therapeutic approaches have received approval by the FDA for treatment of urological malignancies, most notably the systemic administration of interleukin (IL) 2 against metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and the intravesical instillation of bacillus Calmette-Guérin or interferon α for superficial bladder cancer. Active spe cific immunotherapeutic approaches, in the form of cancer vaccines, have just begun to show therapeutic success in genitourinary and other malignancies,  2  and are, therefore, considered an attractive avenue for oncol ogy research and drug development. In this Review, we first provide a concise update on the results of cancer vaccine trials in the field of urological oncology. We then highlight the problems presented by the phenomenon of tumormediated immunosuppression. Finally, we discuss novel translational interventions to counteract immuno suppressive pathways in the tumor microenvironment in order to enhance the immunological and clinical efficacy of cancer vaccines.

Cancer vaccines
Cancer vaccines are designed to stimulate expansion of the cellular arm of the immune system, especially T cells and natural killer cells. Cytotoxic and helper T lympho cytes are the main immune effector cells, which kill tumor cells with pinpoint accuracy via receptormediated inter actions (Figure  1 ). Both cell types require activation by antigenpresenting cells, such as dendritic cells (DCs), to recognize and kill tumor cells in context with MHC self antigens. Natural killer cells, by contrast, kill rather non specifically and represent the first line of immunological defense against cancer and foreign pathogens (Box 1). Many vaccine approaches have shown high efficacy at triggering Tcell responses against TAAs in tumor bearing animals-these approaches include vaccina tion with genemodified tumor cells, antigenloaded DCs, recombinant viral expression cassettes, and heat shock proteins.  3  All these approaches have now moved from the preclinical research arena into clinical trials, the results of which have been previously reviewed.  4  Although contemporary vaccine strategies are relatively effective at enhancing cellular immune responses against tumors in animals and humans, clinical responses and tumor regression have been observed in only a few clini cal trials. Overall, rates of tumor regression have seldom exceeded 5-10%, and the discouragingly short duration of these responses (no more than a few months) has raised serious questions regarding the efficacy of this treatment approach.  3  Many explanations have been offered for the limited capacity of cancer vaccines to induce tumor regres sion. First, therapeutic cancer vaccines must be initially studied in patients with advanced or metastatic disease, who typically exhibit a profoundly suppressed immune response. Second, the immunogenicity of the TAAs used in reported vaccine formulations is low, as most TAAs represent selfantigens that are overexpressed or reactivated in cancer cells relative to the non cancerous cells from which they originated.  [4] [5] [6] [7] [8]  Finally, tumors can evade the immune system (including the immune responses triggered by vaccination) through the induc tion of immune tolerance or immune suppression,  [9] [10] [11] [12] [13]  as discussed in the later sections of this manuscript.

Recent results
Two clinical trials in patients with metastatic prostate cancer-one of genemodified prostate tumor cells and the other of prostate acid phosphatase (PAP) antigen loaded DCs-have recently received major attention. At the 2009 American Society for Clinical Oncology (ASCO) Genitourinary Cancer Symposium, Small and colleagues  14  reported the results of vITAL2, a multi center, randomized, phase III clinical trial designed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of GvAX ®  (Cell Genesys  Inc., South San Francisco, CA, uSA) immunotherapy in combination with docetaxel chemotherapy versus docetaxel chemotherapy and prednisone in patients with hormonerefractory prostate cancer.  14  GvAX ® is a vaccine that consists of a mixture of allogeneic prostate tumor cells genetically engineered to secrete granulocyte-macrophage colonystimulating factor (GMCSF). This trial included only patients with taxane naive, castrationresistant prostate cancer who had pain that required opioid analgesia; the primary end point was superiority in overall survival. The study was pre maturely halted owing to an observed imbalance in death rates between the two treatment arms. Overall, vITAL2 enrolled 408 patients, 114 of whom died during the course of the trial: 67 in the GvAX ® plus docetaxel combination treatment arm and 47 in the docetaxel-prednisone control arm. Analysis revealed no significant difference in the patients' base line character istics or toxic effects of treatment that could explain the imbalance in death rate. A survival advantage (14.1 months versus 12.2 months; hazard ratio 1.7, 95% CI 1.15-2.53) was seen in the control arm (docetaxel-prednisone) over the experimental arm. These results were surprising as earlierphase studies had established a very favorable adverseeffect profile of the vaccine; adverse events mainly consisted of mild injectionsite reactions and flulike symptoms. While the cause of the poorer survival with the vaccine therapy is currently being investigated, this study highlights that caution must be exercised when con ducting combinatorial drug trials, especially when the toxic effects and effector mechanisms of combined drug action have not been fully elucidated. Although several experimental studies have alluded to potential synergy between chemotherapy and vaccines, ques tions related to the mechanisms of action, the timing of administra tion, and the appropriate choice of agents are still unanswered. 11 On a morepositive note, at the 2009 American urological Association annual meeting, Schellhammer Key points Cancer vaccines are designed to stimulate an antitumor immune response ■ via expansion of the cellular arm of the immune system, especially T cells or natural killer cells At present, the therapeutic effect of cancer vaccines in patients with advanced ■ genitourinary cancers is limited In patients with cancer, tumors promote immunosuppression via multiple ■ mechanisms including secretion of tumor-derived factors, mobilization of bonemarrow-derived suppressor myeloid cells and induction of T-regulatory cells An immunosuppressive microenvironment helps cancer cells to evade immune ■ recognition and immune-mediated destruction Simultaneous targeting of tumor-induced immune suppression and ■ administration of a cancer vaccine has great potential to boost the antitumor immune response and produce a more-powerful therapeutic effect than vaccination alone Clinical trials that are investigating combinatorial approaches that entail ■ abrogation of tumor-induced immunosuppression followed by active immunotherapy are ongoing in many academic and industry programs et al. 2 reported that sipuleucelT (Provenge ® ; Dendreon Corporation, Seattle, WA, uSA)-a vaccine consisting of autologous antigenpresenting cells activated in vitro by use of a recombinant fusion protein (PAP-GM CSF)-increased the median survival of men with metastatic prostate cancer compared with a placebo control, without significant toxic effects. 2 In contrast to the prematurely terminated vITAL2 trial, this random ized, placebocontrolled, phase III study (named IMPACT) enrolled only patients with asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic hormonerefractory prostate cancer (n = 512). The primary end point of this study was overall survival. The patients' demographic and baseline characteristics were similar in the experimental and control treatment arms. Patients who received sipu leucelT had a 4.1month improvement in their median survival (25.8 months versus 21.7 months) and a greater than threefold increase in survival at 36 months com pared with those who received placebo. Interestingly, no significant delay was found in the time to objective disease progression and PSA response. These data are currently being reviewed by the FDA and their deci sion on this drug's approval is pending. No doubt the appropriate selection of patients, improvement in man ufacturing processes, the choice of adjuvant strate gies, and the development of bio markers to measure treat ment success will all be critical to upcoming trials with this and other vaccine approaches. As these trials were phase III registration trials with survival as the end point, immune response analysis was not reported. However, earlier phase I-II trials demonstrated that sipuleucelT can induce PAPspecific Tcell responses, while GvAX ® induced an eosinophilic infiltrate at the injection site.

Tumor-mediated immunosuppression
Cancer vaccines are designed to activate and mobilize the host's adaptive immune response against tumors in ReVIewS a targeted, antigenspecific fashion. Despite consider able progress in the identification of TAAs and in the develop ment of effective vaccination strategies, the clini cal results of therapeutic cancer vaccination have been disappointing thus far. One of the reasons for the lack of success is that virtually all antitumor vaccines were ini tially studied in patients with bulky or metastatic disease. However, patients with advanced malignancy have a com promised immune system and exhibit alterations in the proliferative and cytotoxic capacities of their T cells and natural killer cells, and in host cytokine expression and production.  [9] [10] [11] 15, 16  Ample evidence indicates that distinct compartments of the tumor microenvironment directly modulate the immune system via secretion of immuno suppressive factors such as TNF, TGFβ1, vascular endothelial growth factor (veGF), GCSF, and GMCSF (Figure  2 ). These gene products mediate the conversion of tumor infiltrating and peripheral myeloid cells-bone marrowderived precursor cells that give rise to various hematopoietic cells such as leukocytes, monocytes, and DCs-into immunosuppressive, myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), tumorassoci ated macro phages, or Thelper2biased, tolerogenic DCs.  16, 17  MDSCs express the transmembrane glyco protein CD11b and are key mediators of immuno suppression in the tumorbearing host and of tumor growth via the stimulation of angiogenesis and tumor progres sion. MDSCs can be divided into two major cate gories, namely CD33 + CD11b + myelomonocytic cells  [18] [19] [20]  and CD15 + CD11b + CD14 -granulocytetype cells.  [20] [21] [22]  Both these cell types are profoundly immunosuppressive and represent independent lineages that arise from myeloid precursor cells. A typical hallmark of MDSCs is the overexpression of arginase 1, a key enzyme in the inhibi tion of Tcell responses.  23, 24  Moreover, oxidative stress and secretion of nitric oxide (NO) by MDSCs contribute to the hostile, immunosuppressive tumor micro environment by attenuating Tcell function.  [25] [26] [27] [28]  MDSCs are frequently detected in the peripheral blood of patients with metastatic RCC  18, 19, 21, 29  or bladder carcinoma (e. eruslanov, personal communication). Moreover, MDSC frequencies seem to correlate with the stage of the disease, and potentially provide an important biomarker of prognosis. Studies have shown that MDSCs can trigger expan sion of another important immunosuppressive cell ular subset, termed Tregulatory cells (T ReG ).  30  T ReG represent an important, highly specialized subpopula tion of CD4 + Thelper cells that suppress activation of other T cells, especially of those specific against self antigens.  31  Interest in T ReG biology has been heightened by recent studies that demonstrate enhanced cancer vaccinemediated immunity after T ReG elimination.  32  In humans, T ReG are character ized by expression of the highaffinity CD25 αchain of the IL2 receptor (IL2R) and the trans cription factor forkhead box P3 (FOXP3). As with MDSCs, signifi cantly elevated T ReG levels are found in the peripheral blood of patients with cancer, and increased T ReG frequencies are associated with reduced overall survival.  32, 33  As MDSCs and T ReG are major contributors to cancer mediated immunosuppression, considerable interest exists in further investigating these cellular subsets and in developing pharmacological interventions to reduce their immunosuppressive properties and, thereby, stim ulate immune responses against cancer. In the follow ing sections, we will delineate the molecular pathways associated with MDSCmediated and T ReG mediated immunosuppression and provide novel insights into translational strategies that might counteract immuno suppressive networks in the tumor microenvironment in urological cancer (Table  1 ). Cancer vaccine Antigen-presenting cell CD8 + cytotoxic T cell MHC class I Activated CD8 + T cell Expansion of CD8 + T cells CD4 + T-helper cell MHC class II Activated CD4 + T cell Cytokines B cell Plasma cell Antibodies Tumor cell Tumor cell death

ReVIewS


Targeting of MDSCs
The importance of immunosuppressive pathways in tumors is well accepted by basic science and clinical investigators. As a result, the concept of favorably altering the tumor microenvironment to enable immune effector cells to interact with their tumor targets has become an exciting new direction in translational immunological research. Owing to the highly complex organization of the tumor microenvironment, a variety of approaches that target specific pathways are presently being consid ered in order to achieve favorable tumor tissue condi tioning for therapy and to reverse the negative effect of tumors on immune function.

The receptor tyrosine kinase pathway
Receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors represent a rapidly growing family of drugs with demonstrated clinical activity against malignancy, especially RCC. These agents target critical growth pathways that modulate tumor progres sion and metastatic potential.  34  Moreover, some of these agents induce immunostimulatory effects by down regulating the secretion of immuno suppressive factors in the tumor microenvironment.  35, 36  For example, the multi kinase inhibitor sunitinib shows both anti tumor and immunomodulatory activity after oral administration. In patients with metastatic RCC, sunitinib significantly reduced MDSC and T ReG numbers in the peripheral blood.  35, 36  Moreover, improved Tcell responses and abroga tion of MDSCmediated immuno suppression were achieved via reduction of levels of immuno suppressive cytokines and transcription factors and enhancement of interferon γ secretion by T cells.  37  Importantly, tumors of sunitinibtreated mice exhibited remarkable infiltra tion of cytotoxic CD8 + T cells and CD4 + Thelper cells, which suggested druginduced activa tion and successful homing of T cells into tumors. The antitumor and immuneenhancing effects of sunitinib might be mediated via a common mechanism, namely inhibition of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3).  38  STAT3 is not only con stitutively activated in various cancer cells, but also in MDSCs, which thereby inhibits differentiation of DCs and promotes tumor immune evasion (Figure  3 ).  39  Cumulatively, these data suggest that sunitinib, and maybe other receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors, can be used effectively to reverse tumorinduced immuno suppression. Thus, the clinical evaluation of combina torial regimens that study potential synergism between sunitinib and immunological approaches is ongoing in many academic and industry settings.

PgE 2 metabolism
Prostaglandin e 2 (PGe 2 ) is a key molecule that prevents the generation of antitumor immune responses by inhib iting maturation and function of DCs.  40, 41  Moreover, intratumoral PGe 2 promotes tumor growth by activat ing signaling pathways that regulate cell proliferation, migration, apoptosis, and angiogenesis.  40, 41  Intratumoral PGe 2 levels are physiologically regulated through NAD + linked 15hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (15PGDH), an enzyme that facilitates degradation of PGe 2 . expression and catabolic activity of 15PGDH is frequently decreased in cancer tissues,  42  which causes profound immuno suppression via increased intra tumoral levels of PGe 2 . Loss of 15PGDH expression correlates with tumor progression in colorectal, lung, and transitional cell bladder cancers.  40  We have shown that targeted overexpression of HPGD (the gene encod ing 15PGDH) at the tumor site can significantly reduce PGe 2 levels in the tumor microenvironment and promote a therapeutic antitumor response in animals that carry prostate or colon carcinomas.  43  Thus, forced expression or pharmacological stimulation of 15PGDH in the tumor microenvironment with recombinant expression vectors or other gene delivery systems might represent an effective approach to reduce immunosuppressive intratumoral PGe 2 levels and to promote stimulation of effective antitumor immune responses, both innate and vaccineinduced. A second major approach by which intratumoral PGe 2 synthesis can be modulated is via inhibition of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2).  44  COX enzymes convert arachidonic acid to prostaglandins, including PGe 2 , and thromboxane. Recent clinical research suggests that aspirin and other NSAIDs, which are wellcharacterized inhibitors of COX2, can reduce the incidence of certain human malignancies, including colorectal and prostate cancers.  45, 46  Selective COX2 inhibition facilitates cyto toxic CD8 + Tlymphocyte infiltration of tumors, elevates systemic IL12 and interferon γ levels, and reduces levels of IL10  [47] [48] [49] [50]  and MDSCs in a tumorbearing mouse host.  51, 52  In addition, adjunctive COX2 inhibitors increase the potency of cancer vaccines and prolong sur vival in experimental animals.  53, 54  Moreover, the clinically available compound NOaspirin (nitricoxidereleasing aspirin) interferes with the Tcell inhibitory activity of 

ReVIewS
MDSCs.  55  NOaspirin possesses no direct antitumor activity, but it can normalize the immune status of tumor bearing animals by increasing the number and function of TAAspecific T lymphocytes and by enhancing the efficacy of the vaccineinduced immune response. These preclinical data provide the scientific rationale for two ongoing clinical trials that are exploring the synergistic effects of cancer vaccines and NOaspirin in patients with advanced neoplastic diseases.  19, 56  Despite their favorable effects on the immune system, prolonged use of highdose COX2selective inhibitors is associ ated with unacceptable cardiovascular adverse effects.  57, 58  These effects must be carefully considered in the design, planning, and execution of clinical trials that investi gate potential synergy between COX2 inhibitors and immuno logical treatments for cancer.

Arginine metabolism
Increased metabolic activity of larginine in MDSCs and tumorassociated macrophages triggers impairment of Tlymphocyte responses to tumor antigens.  59  essential components of this Tlymphocyte suppression pathway include two enzymes that compete for larginine as a substrate: arginase and NO synthase. Arginase is, there fore, implicated in the regulation of synthesis of both NO and polyamines, both of which are detri mental to Tcell function. Cancers exhibit an altered arginine metab olism because expression of arginase is upregulated in the tumor microenvironment. Increased arginase activity reduces access to free arginine and blocks the prolifera tion of Teffector cells as a result of arginine starvation.  60  Both arginase type 1 and 2 have been implicated in tumorinduced immune dysfunction in metastatic RCC  22  and prostate cancer.  25  Importantly, expression of argi nase in myeloid cells is inducible and can be regulated by type II cytokines, such as IL4 and IL13, and by PGe 2 .  61  Preclinical studies have shown that inhibition of arginase activity significantly delays tumor growth in mice.  61  These results indicate that arginase modulates the larginine metabolic pathway to regulate both Tcell function and tumor cell growth. Blockade of arginase type 1 or 2 in a clinical setting might aid in the restoration of immune function by increasing larginine availability for Tcell use and might lead to a decrease in tumor cell growth. Targeting the relationship between arginase and the immune system might offer therapeutic approaches for patients with advanced malignancies.

IDo and tryptophan metabolism
Indoleamine 2,3dioxygenase (IDO) is an immuno suppressive molecule that regulates Tcell proliferation and differentiation  62  by reducing access to free trypto phan, an amino acid essential for Tcell proliferation.  63, 64  IDO is expressed by immunosuppressive DCs, which can be found in tumor tissues and draining lymph nodes of patients with advanced malignancy.  63  As IDO has a major role in the escape of malignant cells from immunological attack, blocking IDOmediated pathways should improve antitumor responses and potentially lead to tumor regres sion. Considerable efforts are underway to develop IDO inhibitors that mitigate pathological immunosuppression for clinical trials.  65  In this regard, the competitive IDO inhibitor 1methyltryptophan (1MT) significantly delays Figure  2  | elevated numbers of immunosuppressive myeloid cells in the peripheral blood of patients with cancer. Tumor cells, for example renal cell carcinoma, secrete a variety of bioactive products that stimulate mobilization of immature myeloid cells from bone marrow into the peripheral blood. These cells are profoundly immunosuppressive and support tumor growth via inhibition of adaptive immune responses. By contrast, the proportion of T H 1-biased dendritic cells and their immediate precursors are reduced in patients with cancer. Both the secreted products and myeloid cells are candidates for targeted therapies to enhance the efficacy of cancer vaccines (red text). Finally, many tumor-recruited myeloid cells migrate into tumor tissues where they support tumor growth via local immunosuppression and stimulation of neoangiogenesis (see Figure  3 ). Abbreviations: ATRA, all-trans retinoic acid; COX-2, cyclo-oxygenase 2; G-CSF, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colonystimulating factor; IL, interleukin; NO-aspirin, nitric-oxide-releasing aspirin; PGe 2 , prostaglandin e 2 ; TGF-β1, transforming growth factor β1; T H 1, T-helper lymphocyte type 1; VeGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.

Renal cell carcinoma


Secretion


Bone marrow


Increased number of immunosuppressive factors


Reduced number of immune activators


Circulation
Anti-VEGF agents COX-2 inhibitors Anti-TGF-β agents VEGF, G-CSF, GM-CSF, IL-10, TGF-β1, PGE 2

NO-aspirin Arginase inhibitors


Macrophages


Granulocytes


Myeloid cells ATRA


Monocytes


Dendritic cells ( IL-12, T H 1)


Immunosuppression


ReVIewS
tumor growth in mouse models.  66  Moreover, a synergistic therapeutic effect of 1MT in combination with immuno therapy, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy has recently been demonstrated.  65  Aside from 1MTbased IDO inhibi tion, gene silencing strategies based on small interfering RNAs and smallmolecule inhibitors are currently being developed with the aim of reversing immuno suppression and halting tumor progression by blocking the IDO suppres sion pathway.  67  recruitment of bone-marrow-derived cells Tumorrecruited bonemarrowderived cells (BMDCs) mediate tumorinduced immune suppression, promote tumor vascularization, and stimulate tumor meta stasis.  [68] [69] [70] [71]  BMDCs represent a mixed cell population that includes hematopoietic progenitor cells, myeloid cells, and precursors of endothelial and stromal cells. Seemingly, tumor growth and metastatic develop ment can be prevented by reducing the trafficking of BMDCs into tumor sites (Figure  3 ).  25  Several mol ecules and mechanisms can modulate tumormediated recruitment of BMDCs, including veGF receptors and chemokine CXCL12-CXCR4mediated pathways.  17, [72] [73] [74] [75] [76] [77]  Overexpression of veGF promotes mobilization of veGFR1 + CXCR4 + BMDCs into the peripheral blood, and thus promotes immuno suppression. Tumorderived veGF also inhibits differentiation of DCs and promotes accumulation of MDSCs in the tumorbearing host.  [78] [79] [80]  Importantly, a considerable interplay seems to exist between the CXCR4 and veGFR1 pathways as both receptors are highly upregulated under conditions of hypoxia or oxidative stress.  26, 81  Targeting the veGF-veGFR and stromal cellderived factor 1 (SDF1)-CXCR4 axes, therefore, is a promising approach for immunomodulatory cancer therapy. Pharmacological inhibition of veGF is now widely applied in the clini cal setting as veGF is over expressed by many tumors, including RCC and colorectal carci noma.  82  example drugs include the monoclonal antibody bevacizumab and the fusion protein aflibercept, both of which have shown antitumor activity in clinical trials.  83  Synergistic activity has been reported in preclinical studies when cancer vaccines are combined with veGF blockade.  84  Also, pharmacological inhibition of the SDF1-CXCR4 axis promotes anti tumor immunity by facilitating Tcell attraction to and lympho cyte infiltra tion of tumors.  85  

MDSC differentiation
Studies have demonstrated that the application of growth and differentiation factors facilitates differentia tion of MDSCs into immunostimulatory DCs and other antigen presenting cells.  19  These experiments further suggest that overcoming tumormediated arrest of differentia tion in myeloid cells and stimulating potent immune responses in the context of cancer vaccination are possible. Accordingly, we and others have shown that alltrans retinoic acid (ATRA, a retinoid acid derivate with antineoplastic activity) can promote differentiation of MDSCs into DCs in vitro and in vivo.  19, 56, 86  Moreover, ATRAmediated depletion of MDSCs in the peripheral blood of patients with RCC resulted in improved CD4 + and CD8 + Tcell responses and significantly enhanced the efficacy of cancer vaccination.  19, 56  These results have prompted several ongoing clinical trials that include ATRA as part of a multimodal approach against RCC and other carcinomas. Similarly, gemcitabine, a chemotherapeutic agent effective against various forms of solid tumor, reduces levels of Gr1 + CD11b + MDSCs in mice that bear large tumors of different origins.  87  Depletion of MDSCs was   35, 36  animal studies  37, 38  PGe 2 metabolism COX-2 inhibitors,  61  15-PGDH  50, 52, 95  Lung adenocarcinoma, colon carcinoma Animal studies  43, 53, 54  Arginine metabolism Nor-NOHA, l-norvaline  23, 24, 95  Prostate adenocarcinoma, mammary carcinoma, lung cancer Clinical study;  25  animal studies  61, 95  Tryptophan metabolism 1-methyltryptophan  62  Breast cancer, melanoma Animal study  66  BMDC recruitment CXCR4 antagonists, anti-VeGF agents  25, 52, 81  RCC, melanoma, other Clinical studies;  83, 84  animal study 85 T ReG Denileukin diftitox, 32 cyclophosphamide 91 RCC, melanoma, other Clinical study; 32 animal study 94 MDSC ATRA 64,86 RCC, mammary carcinoma Animal study; 86 clinical trial 56 MDSC PDe5 inhibitors 56 Colon carcinoma, mammary carcinoma Animal study 89 MDSC Gemcitabine 89 Lung cancer Animal study 87 MDSC NSAIDs 87 Colon carcinoma Animal study 55 Abbreviations: 15-PGDH, 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase; ATRA, all-trans retinoic acid; BMDC, bone-marrow-derived cell; COX-2, cyclo-oxygenase 2; CXCR4, C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4; MDSC, myeloid-derived suppressor cell; Nor-NOHA, Nω-hydroxy-nor-l-arginine; PDe5, phosphodiesterase type 5; PGe 2 , prostaglandin e 2 ; RCC, renal cell carcinoma; RTK, receptor tyrosine kinase; T ReG , T-regulatory cells; VeGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.

ReVIewS
accompanied by an increase in the antitumor activity of CD8 + cytotoxic T cells and by markedly enhanced antitumor efficacy in animals inoculated with tumor cells, which suggested that gemcitabine might be a realistic strategy for reducing levels of MDSCs in humans in conjunction with either active or passive immuno therapeutic approaches. While the exact mechanism of immune enhancement for gemcitabine is currently under investigation, its activity might be explained by increased chemosensitivity of MDSCs or a differentiation promoting action of the drug. The phosphodiesterase type 5 pathway Phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDe5) inhibitors are a drug class currently in clinical use for various nonmalignant disorders, including pulmonary hypertension and erec tile dysfunction.  88  Interestingly, sildenafil downregulates expression of arginase 1 and NO synthase 2, and thereby limits recruitment of immunosuppressive Gr1 + CD11b + MDSCs by the enlarging tumor. Sildenafilmediated PDe5 inhibition has no direct effect on tumors, but the drug reverses tumorinduced immunosuppression and is associated with a measurable antitumor immune response in mice.  89  Moreover, sildenafil enhances intratumoral Tcell infiltration and activation, reduces tumor outgrowth, and improves the antitumor efficacy of adoptive Tcell therapy. As tumorderived factors that mediate MDSCdependent immunosuppression in mice are also active in humans, these data suggest a potentially novel use of PDe5 inhibitors as adjuncts to tumorspecific immunotherapy.

Targeting of T REG
The ability of tumors to evade destruction by immune effector cells is an important characteristic that enables their uncontrolled growth and survival. Novel insights suggest that tumor immune evasion can be controlled by the modulation of cellular subsets that control immune responses to selfantigens.  90  Among these approaches are therapies directed against CD4 + T ReG , a cellular subset capable of suppressing CD4 + and CD8 + effector T cells through the secretion of suppressive cytokines, IL2 con sumption, and cytolysis. T ReG physiologically dampen the function of antigenpresenting cells by decreasing co stimulation or antigen presentation, particularly against selfantigens.  31  T ReG are, therefore, important regula tors that prevent autoimmune responses and recogni tion of selfantigens via direct celltocell interactions. enhanced understanding of the immune attenuating mechanisms of T ReG might offer insight into how T ReG function can be manipulated in context with other immunomodulatory strategies. On the basis of the fundamental role of T ReG in suppres sion of antitumor immunity, depleting or functionally inactivating this cellular subset in patients with cancer has been proposed as a strategy to boost the efficacy of cancer immunotherapy.  91  Targeting of CD25 Studies have shown that T ReG can be efficiently depleted by monoclonal antibodies that target CD25, the αchain of IL2R, and that such treatment can induce the rejec tion of transplantable tumors.  92  CD25 is present on the cell surface of a variety of hematopoietic cells but is overexpressed by T ReG , which forms the basis for novel interventions by use of compounds with high selectivity for CD25. Denileukin diftitox is a fusion protein consisting of fulllength IL2 fused to the enzymatically active and translocating domains of diphtheria toxin. This protein is nontoxic, but it inhibits protein synthesis after internaliza tion into the cytosol of CD25expressing cells via intracellular release of diphtheria toxin. Denileukin diftitox is capable of selectively killing IL2Rexpressing cells, such as activated T cells and some tumor cells that express CD25.  93  Malignant cells that express one or more subunits of IL2R can be found in certain leukemias and lymphomas, some solid tumors of the head and neck, nonsmallcell lung cancer, RCC, and sarcoma. The exquisite selectivity for the CD25 domain of IL2R and its thorough characterization in prior clinical trials make denileukin diftitox a suitable reagent for in vivo Blood vessel Recruited bone-marrow-derived myeloid cells TAM MDSC Tolerogenic DC Immune evasion T REG Tumor-derived factors: VEGF, PGE 2 , IL-10, IL-6, IL-1β, SDF, TGF-β1 Renal cell carcinoma Bone-marrow-derived progenitor cells Induced differentiation Myeloid cells CD11b +

ReVIewS
depletion of CD25 + T ReG . A combinatorial regimen consisting of denileukin diftitox followed by DCbased vaccina tion selectively eliminates T ReG with high expres sion of CD25 from the peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients with metastatic RCC without toxic effects on other cellular subsets with intermediate or low expression of CD25.  32  Importantly, antiCD25 mediated T ReG depletion resulted in enhanced stimulation of pro liferative and cytotoxic Tcell responses in vitro, but only when denileukin diftitox was omitted during the Tcellpriming phase. In patients with metastatic RCC, denileukindiftitoxmediated elimination of T ReG fol lowed by vaccination with tumorRNA transfected DCs significantly improved tumorspecific Tcell responses compared with vaccination alone.  32  These data suggest the feasibility of transiently purging T ReG from patients with cancer to enhance a vaccinemediated antitumor effect.

Nonspecific T rEg depletion
Animal experiments have shown that treatment with cyclophosphamide, a cytotoxic agent with a dual effect on the immune system, can decrease T ReG numbers in a dosedependent fashion.  94  Aside from nonspecific cyto toxic activity, additional mechanisms that might explain cyclophosphamidemediated T ReG elimination include the direct inhibition of T ReG function, enhancement of tumor antigen presentation, and amplification of Thelper1biased CD4 + Tcell responses. unfortunately, cyclophosphamidemediated T ReG depletion seems to be rather nonspecific, as other CD4 + Tcell populations, such as naive CD4 + T cells (CD4 + CD25 -) or memory and effector CD4 + T cells (CD4 + and intermediate expres sion of CD25), are depleted following systemic cyclo phosphamide therapy. Nevertheless, clinical trials that seek to deplete T ReG with lowdose cyclo phosphamide followed by active immunotherapy are currently ongoing in several institutions.

Conclusions and future perspectives
Novel insights into tumor immunology and biology have accelerated efforts to bring new cancer thera pies into clinical practice. Immunebased therapies, such as cancer vaccines, have demonstrated efficacy at inducing immuno logical antitumor responses in patients with cancer. However, vaccineinduced clini cal responses are sporadic and generally of only short duration. As a possible explana tion, tumormediated immune suppres sion represents a major obstacle to the stimulation of Tcell responses for clinical effect. Thus, novel strategies to abrogate tumormediated immuno suppression and restore immuno competence in these patients are mandatory. Studies show that by counter acting local or peripheral immuno suppression, the potential for a therapeutic response to cancer vaccines is markedly enhanced. A thorough understanding of the mechanisms that mediate immune evasion is, therefore, neces sary to define and develop new molecular targets for therapy. Targeting these molecules might augment vaccine induced immune responses and improve clinical outcomes in patients with cancer. Cancer is a complex disease, and successful vaccine therapy will require a multimodal or combinatorial treatment approach. Critical elements of such a con certed therapeutic strategy include not only improved vaccine formulations, but also strategies to reverse immunosuppressive pathways in the tumor micro environment. Future clinical trials will provide better insight into the optimum combination of agents to reverse tumor mediated immunosuppression and induce Tcell responses with clinical impact.

Review criteria
In addition to articles known to the authors, the full PubMed and MeDLINe databases and proceedings of the American Society for Clinical Oncology annual meetings were searched for published papers and abstracts using the following search terms: "cancer vaccines", "[vaccines] AND [urologic cancers]", "[prostate cancer] AND [vaccines]", "tumor microenvironment", "tumorinduced immunosuppression", "myeloid-derived suppressor cells", and "regulatory T cells". Papers were selected for inclusion on the basis of level of evidence and relevance to the topic. Only articles published in english have been cited in this Review.

ReVIewS
